Produced by David Cortesi and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.
"I was there"
with the
Yanks
in France
Sketches by
C. LeRoy Baldridge
Private, A.E.F.
The Knickerbocker Press
Copyright, 1919
Ours the Great Adventure,
Yours the pain to bear,
Ours the golden service stripes,
Yours the marks of care.
If all the Great Adventure
The old Earth ever knew,
Was ours and in this little book
'Twould still belong to you!
These Sketches were made during a year's service as a camion driver with
the French amry in the Chemin-des-Dames sector and a year's service with
the A.E.F. as an infantry private on special duty with "The Stars and
Stripes," the official A.E.F. newspaper. Most of them were drawn at odd
minutes during the French push of 1917 near Fort Malmaison, at loading
parks and along the roadside while on truck convoy, and while on special
permission to draw and paint with the French army given me by the Grand
Quartier Gènèral during the time I was stationed at Soissons. The rest
were drawn on American fronts from the Argonne to Belgium as my duties
took me from one offensive to another.
It has been a keen regret to me that my artistic skill has been so
unequal to these opportunites.  The sketches do not sufficiently show
war for the stupid horror I know it to be.
I hope, however, they may serve as a record of doughboy types, of the
people he lived with in France, with whom he suffered and by whose side
he fought.
Many appeared first in "The Stars and Stripes," "Leslie's Weekly", and
"Scribner's Magazine", through the courtesy of whose editors I am now
enabled to reprint them.
C. LeRoy Baldridge
Private, Am.E.F.
June 1919
Seicheprey, America's old home sector--first trenches entirely under
their own command.
Form a line!
Get in line!
From the time that I enlisted
And since Jerry armististed
I've been standing, kidding, cussing,
I've been waiting, fuming, fussing,
In a line.
I have stood in line in mud and slime and sleet,
With the dirty water oozing from my feet,
I have soaked and slid and slipped,
While my tacky slicker dripped,
And I wondered what they'd hand me out to eat.
Get in line!
For supplies and for inspections,
With the dust in four directions,
For a chance to scrub the dirt off,
In the winter with my shirt off,
In a line.
I have sweated in an August training camp,
That would make a prohibition town look damp,
Underneath my dinky cap
While the sun burned off my map
And I waited for some gold-fish (and a cramp!).
Get in line!
For rice, pay-day, pills, and ration,
For corned-willy, army fashion,
In Hoboken, in the trenches,
In a station with the Frenchies,
In a line.
I've been standing, freezing, sweating,
Pushing, shoving, wheezing, fretting,
And I won't be soon forgetting
Though I don't say I'm regretting
That I stood there, with my buddies,
In a line.
The Lids We Wear--
(men bathing from canvas bucket)]
The Ration Detail--a job which no one relishes. Each day the other
fellow's artillery tries to lay down a fire which will keep these boys
from getting back. They travel to where their supply company has dumped
the food from mule carts--the point nearest front where creaking wheels
may go. The man in the center is carrying a string of French loaves, the
round black variety common before we got our own bakeries started.
its bath...]
The Headquarters Company of the Reserve Mallet taking its bath at
Chavigeny Farm. The tub is a tin-lined cigarette box used by the
Y.M.C.A. Water is heated in the old farm fire-place.
I ran into Johnny Redlegs
A-sitting on his bus,
And I asked him why the devil
He dropped half his shells on us.
He just smiles and puffs his corn-cob,
As peaceful as a Persian,
And, "Buddy," says he, "you can't blame me,
You gotta blame dispersion."
I says to Johnny Redlegs,
"If I didn't have nine lives
Your barrage would have got me
With those lousy seventy-fives."
He grins and puffs his corn-cob,
And then he winks, reflective,
And, "Buddy," says he, "you can't blame me
If you pass your damn objective."
I says to Johnny Redlegs
(Just kidding him, you know),
"The trouble with your popgun is
She pops too gol-darned slow."
Then Redlegs drops his corn-cob
And spits on both his han's,
And, "Buddy," says he, "you can kid with me
And the whole damned Field Artilleree,
But there'll be a dud where you used to be
If you kid my swasont-cans!"
"Johnny Redlegs"--guardian of the "Soixant-quinze." (the famous French "75")
...and the doughboy who tries to keep just the right distance from the
covering barrage fire.
Among the first sent across/They served with the French in '17
American and French field artillery gun crews
camped together in a wood
near Charsoney. The canvas overhead keeps the fire from being observed
by aeroplanes at night.
The linesman at the front--
Same old job with just a couple percent more risk than usual
Using a shell-shocked tree for a telegraph pole.
St. Mihiel 1918
Dumb Beasts
bucks: "Maud" and "Mud"
Former refugee--now mascot and the only man in the outfit who likes
monkey meat
z-z-z-z-z-z-Z-Z-Z-Z-e-e-e-e-E-E-------------b Boom!
There's another!
God, this pack is heavy.
Glad I pinched the extra willy,
Guess I'll need it.
And the sweater, too,
out there.
-z-z-z-z-z-z-z-Z-Z-Z-Z-E-E-E-EEEEEE- - b Boom!
There's another!
Jesse! that was a close one.
Wonder if......good Christ! Where's Charlie?
Got him clean. God curse those Jerries!
I'll get even,--p'raps--
out there.
z-z-z-z-z-z-z-z-Z-Z-Z-E-E-E-E-e-e----------b Boom!
There's another!
Over!
Well, if one has my name on it
Then the guv'ment pays ten thousand.
What's the use? I couldn't spend it.
Leastways not--
out there.
z-z-z-z-z-z-z-z-Z-Z-Z-Z-e-e-e-e-e-E-E-E-E----b Boom!
There's another.
Where'd I put that plug of Climax?
Oh, I s'pose somebody swiped it.
Gee, I never thought that Charlie...
Glad I ain't out on the wire.
This damn trench is dark--ouch! Damn it,
Wait a minute.... Hell, I'm coming,
I can't run in this equipment.
What the hell's the rush to get--
out there?
The Relief--
Coming up to the front lines through the communication trenches, which
extend a kilometer or so. On these occasions little love is lost on
"beautiful moonlight nights"
The roofs of Vaux after a few minutes of Yank barrage lifted--
In 1870 Grandpère was taken as a prisoner to Coblenz
Madam Framary who sewed on my buttons and who transformed miserable
French army rations into marvelous dishes
Eraseme, the youngest son who starts his three years of compulsory
training in the fall 1919
The eldest son. After his three years of training he was called to war.
He has never come back.
Soissons--1918
Awaiting the signal to attack. The sergeant is ready to blow the whistle
for his squad to follow him out through a path in the barbed wire. In
another minute they will advance close behind the bursting shells of a
heavy barrage which, lifting, will leave them face to face with German
machine guns.
France 1917
The "Territorial"--the name given French poilu between the ages of 34
and 40
Vailly--1917
Noyon, 1918
The Paris Bus--many kilometers from the Place de l'Opèra--used for
transporting troops, horses, and fresh meat to the front
You can see 'em in the movies,
With the sunlight on their guns,
You can read in all the papers
Of the charge that licked the Huns,
You can read of "khaki heroes"
And of "gleaming bayonet,"
But there's one thing that the writers
And the artist all forget:
That's me!
On K.P.
In my suit of denim blue
I am thinking--not of you--
But the places where I'd like the top to be!
On the posters in the windows,
In the monthly magazine,
Are the boys in leather leggins
Such as Pershing's never seen;
Oh, they love to paint 'em pretty,
All dressed up and fit to kiss,--
Ain't it funny there's a picture
That they always seem to miss?
Bless me soul,
Loading coal!
In my little shimmy-shirt,
Eyes and mouth full up with dirt--
(In the next war I'll be living at the Pole.)
Built for speed / and with light pack to match
R.B.--Belleau Wood / 1918 / A Marine
"Steady, buddy!"
Baldridge
Paris 1919
In an abri waiting for the "Gothas" (big German planes) to go home
The veteran of the Spanish-American war tells 'em how it ought to be
done
R. Lufbery
Sketched at the Lafayette Escadrille field near Longpont as the aviator
was getting into his "union suit" preparatory to flying in a
Chemin-des-Dames engagement
Base port stevedores--Volunteers from the South who work eight hours a
day for seven days a week--Bordeaux/18
A 26th Division Wagon Train moving toward Chasseurs wood--1918
Mule and Prairie Schooner in a country made desert by war
When we left the transport
Back in St. Nazaire,
Second thing you asked us,--
"Quand finit la guerre?"
Didn't know your lingo
You weren't hard to get,
Peace was what you wanted--
And a cigarette.
Then up in the trenches
It was just the same,
"When's it going to finish?"
Didn't seem quite game.
Then we saw you strafing,
Saw we had you wrong,
Wondered how you stood it
Four years long.
Drank your sour pinard,
Shared what smokes we had,
Got to know you better,
Found you weren't so bad,
Four years in the trenches!
(One's enough, I'll say)
How the hell'd you do it
On five sous a day?
American being taught by Frenchman to drive truck so that the latter may
return to his farm.
France/17
Moving up--
over a corduroy road hastily laid down by a gérre (engineer) regiment in
war-wasted land. The piece of wall on the right is all that remains of
a French village of five hundred inhabitants
Senegalaise types / voluneers used for the attack and for labor on roads
Vailly 1917
Moulin Laffaux
He handles a big naval gun mounted on railroad cars near Soissons
In the war of 1870 he drove a team instead of a camion.
Too old to serve in the active army and so assigned to the more
unromatic, uninteresting but vital work of loading camions, tending
horses, or building and repairing roads back of the lines. It has been
said that the first battle of Verdun was won by the camion service.
This is the kind of man who made that victory possible
A "walking case" -- France, August -18
A wounded Chasseur and "Fritz" who has the next cot. They get the same
treatment and neither seems to mind the proximity
Meaux
An American ambulance at a poste de secours (first aid station)
Ostel--1917
Four hours off--two hours on--
And not a thing to do but think,
And watch the mud and twisted wire
And never let your peepers blink.
Two hours on--four hours off--
The dug-out's slimy as the trench;
It stinks of leather, men, and smoke,--
You wake up dopey from the stench.
Four hours off--two hours on--
Back on the same old trick again,
The same old noth'n' to do at all
From yesterday till God knows when.
On post or not it's just the same,
The waiting is what gets your goat
And makes you want to chuck the game
Or risk a trench-knife in your throat.
Two hours on--four hours off--
I s'pose our job is not so hard,--
I s'pose sometime we're going to quit--
*       *       *       *       *
The ghosts we leave--do they stand guard?
The water wagon filled with red-hot coffee going to the ration dump via
shell fire and not losing any time about it--
Outside Belleau wood--June '18
He's been on every front from Chateau-Thierry to the Rhine
Coblenz--1919
After the German Retreat
Cleaning up old quarry used by Fritz as a barracks--Chemin-des-Dames
"Marraines" (Godmothers) who kept their poilu godsons at the front in
good cheer with letters and packages from home, and who took their Yank
cousins to their hearts in the same kindly spirit
Sophie--Marie--Madeleine
in Paris and the provinces--
A type to match the ideal of every man who looks
No one knows where the poilu slang word "Pinard" came from,
but everyone knows what it means. It's half way between water
and red wine, with the kick mostly in the taste. It is served
as an army ration. The poilu's canteen is always full of it.
"We ain't no thin red 'eroes, Nor we aren't no blackguards too."
One of the Agent-de-ville = M.P. teams of Paris patrolling the
boulevard. They have authority over both Yank and poilu.
Paris 1919
The Tommy--Montdiddier 1918
Caught by a star shell at a listening post, and attempting to "freeze"
like a rabbit with the hunter upon him, to look as much like a lump of
mud as possible until the glare dies down.
monastary of Pont St. Maxence]
French Colonial Types: White, black, and half-way
From Algeria
A Zouave
From Morocco
"P.Gs" (prisonneurs de la guerre) who are keeping in physical trim by
lumber work in a forest where once the kings of France took their
morning walks
Croix St. Ouen 1918
A Yank going on leave having a midnight cup of "vin rouge" in a
compartment of a Permissionnares' Train--with a soixante-quinze gunner,
a sailor from a submarine, a chasseur, an aviation sergeant, and several
infantrymen. For the next ten days of "permission" these men can forget
war.
En route--Nice/1918
The barber shop quartette on the trip home--
(no ocean rules about noise this time).
Coming Out! dirty, tired and grinning!
Chateau Thierry
June--1918
Brought up  to the front by the  ration detail
Forty feet underground in an old stone quarry formerly used by the
Germans as barracks. Near Fort Malmaux
This is the cellar of her home.  The house above no longer exists. For
her living she washes clothes for the soldiers. Her daughter with two
young children is a prisoner in Belgium. A third grandchild lives in
this cave
Poulet
"Lui"
This one has won three army citations
"la soupe"
Liaison dog to carry messages
Red Cross dog
Jack - a yank volunteer
French dogs loaned by private families and trained by the army for use
as Red Cross aids, sentinels, and message carriers. Intelligence the
only qualification--any breed goes
Kénaro / S'aïd
Two dogs who worked together at Verdun
Sultane / Picard / Marraine / Filon
"mort pour la patrie"
"Pull the shades down Mary Ann"
A love song from The East--
Our own jazz band
Chemin des Dames--1918--
(Arabic script)
An African Mohommedan, An Indo-Chinese Annamite and a prisoner who all
crack rocks nine hours a day for the roads of France
French Colonials from Northern Africa used in shock troops
I'll be stepping wide in these russet shoes!
Leather putts beside, honest I can't lose!
Guess the guy that had 'em left 'em in a hurry!
What the hell, he's S.O.L.
I should worry.
"That's my second razor!"
"Then gimme the blades."
"Whatcha got there, Buddy?"
"Pair of tailor-mades!"
I'll be walking on air!  Yes ... they was the top's!
He won't need 'em out there - if a big one drops.
"Going to keep that sweater?"
"No, look at the dirt."
"Put that on you, Buddy,
"You'll have to read your shirt!"
If I get that leave I can use 'em to dance.
Well, I should grieve, --he had his chance.
"Nothing doing! Beat it!"
"Saw that luger first!"
"Ten francs says I want it."
"Done. I'll cure this thirst."
Brand-new russet shoes, I'll be stepping high!
Someone's got to lose, glad I ain't the guy.
If I'm going to use 'em, guess I'll have to hurry,
The next H.E. may be meant for me --
I should worry!
In 1870 he lost an arm, in 1917 he lost a son and everything he owns
Lafayette Escadrille Men--
Marcus who helps keep the big planes in order
Pilot
Observer
Loupont France Nov--'17
Making brooms from brushwood at Antibes for use on army roads.
France, Aug 1918
Both under Arms--The "pepère" of the '89 class and the Marie-Louise of
the last call
Soissons France/17
Cafè group of poilus listening to an American popular song for the first
time, sung by Yanks of The American Field Service
Vaux--the town American artillery blew off the map (together with the
German inhabitants)
Dugouts built for German officers near Soissons used by them in 1915.
Decked out with cement and mosaic floors, tile roofs and stained glass
windows. Used by our troops in 1918.
The American Trained Nurse / Am. Hospital No. 5
Before leaving France 750,000 doughboys contributed enough to support
newspaper left nearly three million francs toward their education
Annamites--French colonial troops from Indo-China. These paid Colonials
were used as attacking troops, as laborers on roads and as drivers of
light trucks.
(Blackened teeth are an aid to health and beauty)
An ancestral pipe and a French briquette to light it with
Le Sergent Tam / Lizy-sur-Ouneq(?)
The "white wing" of the French front--but when he puts on his heavy
marching order it means there's an attack coming.
A King in his own country
The Loot is getting wabbly,
With his dinky little pack,--
He can hear the sergeant cussing
But he doesn't dare look back.
But we ain't saying nothing
Since we got the order "route,"
Too dog-dead for even wond'ring
If we'll ever hear "fall out."
My damn rifle and my helmet
Keep on getting in the way,
And my brains are numb and dopey
Try'n' to cuss and try'n' to pray.
My throat's as dry as sawdust
And my right arm's gone to sleep,
And the pack-strap on my shoulder
Cuts a slit two inches deep.
I just lift one foot and shove it
And it hits most any place,
Then I lift and shove the other
T'keep from falling on my face.
If the guide should change the cadence
I'll be damned if I could stop;
If you pushed me with a feather--
Well, I'd just curl up and drop.
And I know damn well there's stragglers
That'll ride up on a truck--
Guess if you ain't born a quitter,
You're just simply outa luck.
I suppose we'll keep on going--
Huh? The Skipper's faced about?
Halt!... I'm dreaming ... in the daisies ...
You don't need ... to say ... "fall out!"
In an old Roman cellar two floors underground where civilians went
during air raids as bombing planes passed over on their way to
Compaigne, Paris, and interior cities. This "cave" was considered
absolutely safe, but in October 1918 was completed demolished by one
"155" shell.
Mess and distribution of mail at the "non-com" school for the M.T.C. at
Longpont
Far from Broadway--S.R.O.--Christmas 1917 at a YMCA hut
"Mission Ambrine"
Compiègne
Hospital for the treatment of burns
Americans quartered in the old abbey St. John de Vine of Soissons in the
spring of '18
Henri, who tends sheep with his assistant (Leroy)
She teaches us French
Jean, who comes around at mess time for "confiture Americaine," and who
has learned how to say "chewing gum" and "cigarette."
And Pierre picked the spuds
Chateau Thierry--France 1918
The town of Cuffies (sur Aisne) held by the Germans till 1916, when the
old inhabitants began moving back in; they were assisted in
re-establishing their life there by the American Red Cross
The site of the home of Madam Crépin where the Red Cross set up a
barrack cottage for her.
Cut off from rations for three days in the wood--with one can of
tomatoes for both food and drink--
It seemed years since I had seen one,--
Years of hiking, sweat and blood,
Didn't think there was a clean one
In these miles of men and mud.
Well, I stood there, laughing, drinking,
Kidding her in bon fransay
But the things that I was thinking
Were a thousand miles away.
Sewed my stripe on like a mother,
Gee! She was a pretty kid....
But I left her like a brother,--
Shake her hand was all I did.
Then I says: "Vous, all right, cherry--"
And my throat stuck, and it hurt....
And I showed her what I carry
In the pocket of my shirt.
Madelon of the village, who washed our clothes--and who still has some
of those we had to leave when we pulled out of the sector in the middle
of the night
Neat but not gaudy
As we come home--on the transport.
Troops coming home from Marseilles go by way of Africa and stop to coal
at Oran. Here the doughboy rests the French Arab soldier with whom He
fought side by side at Soissons.
Reading the Draft Covenant for the League of Nations--Paris
(President Wilson, center, reads, other figures labelled as)
General Bliss
Colonel House
Secretary Lansing
M. Clemenceau
Mr. Balfour
Peace Conference Feb 14 1919
S.S. Canada
Outpost at Molsberg, Germany, an ancient castle which stands just on the
edge of the American occupied area and the Neutral Zone.
We stood up and we didn't say a word,
It felt just like when you have dropped your pack
After a hike, and straightened out your back
And seem just twice as light as any bird.
We stood up straight a