Transcriber's note: The Table of Contents was created by the
Transcriber and placed in the Public Domain.
VOL. XVI.          OCTOBER, 1905.          No. 3.
BY Beatrice Hanscom
The studio in Numero -- rue Boissonade had on its holiday togs: model
stand covered with rugs, tea table much in evidence, framed picture on
the easel, and lilacs enough in the great brass bowl in the corner to
serve as sweetly affirmative witnesses that the heart of Paris and the
heart of spring had renewed their yearly alliance.
To judge from the blitheness of Carrington, he, too, had spring in his
heart and a festal day in prospect.
Life, already lavish in good gifts, was on the point of giving him the
one he most desired to grasp.
At twenty-one he had health, plenty of money, and a talent to which he
considered health and money merely subservient--a talent which lured
him to work indefatigably.
The portrait on which he had lavished himself hung on the line
in the spring salon; and Velantour, the master for whom he had
toiled tirelessly for the last three years--Velantour, the sternest
critic in France, most sparing in praise--Velantour, whose painting
expeditions in the far East were always solitary save for his trusted
courier--_Velantour_ had invited Carrington to go with him to the Vale
of Cashmere and the Himalayas! To paint with him and by his side for
three long, delicious months.
"It is not enough to put people's souls on canvas, _mon cher_, if
you can't put nature's heart back of them," he had told him, hand on
his shoulder. Velantour, whose caustic criticisms usually confined
themselves to technique, and took small account of souls!
Carrington tingled to his finger tips in the desire to be off. Life was
good--was "bully," as Carrington phrased it. And he whistled softly,
rapturous as a thrush, as he crossed the studio to lift a corner of
the rug which covered a trunk masquerading as a seat, a trunk locked
and strapped; packed with an infinite forethought for any possible
contingency that might arise during the trip; with enough paint tubes
and brushes to set up a small dealer; packed, too, with hopes and
aspiration, which luckily take up no room, and do not increase the
excess baggage rate. Had they weighed the smallest fraction of an ounce
apiece, modern hydraulics could not have lifted that trunk a single
inch.
"And we start to-night! Jove, it's unbelievable!" he said, exultantly,
as he dropped the rug corner and stood up, straight and slender and
tall, a handsome boy with his black hair a trifle long, his blue eyes
aglow, his delicate features alight with enthusiasm as he drew in a
long breath of satisfaction.
There was a touch of the romantic in his attire--in the loosely
hanging, dark gray velveteen suit that was almost black, and the soft
cravat that had the color of pigeon's blood.
He was young enough to like that sort of thing, dandy enough to order
those dull gray suits by the half dozen, with long, crimson lined
cloaks and marvelous soft felt hats; and handsome enough to make
Velantour vow he would immortalize him in them. "_Le nouveau_ Van
Dyck," he whispered to himself, for he loved the boy as much as he
believed in his future, and he believed in that with the intensity and
concentrated fervor of a man who permits himself few beliefs.
"To have a son like that!" he would murmur--little, squat,
short-legged, gray-headed, lonely old, famous Velantour; and the words
wrenched his lips into the dry twist of an old grief.
For Velantour's scapegrace son had rested many years in Pere-la-Chaise.
Velantour was coming this afternoon to the informal little reunion
of the half dozen friends whom Carrington had summoned to wish him
God-speed.
With the warning swish of the curtains Carrington turned to see if it
was he even now. But he saw instead a young fellow of his own age, a
youth whose brown hair curled obstinately, whose mouth was wide and
mobile, and who had the kind of snub nose one inevitably associates
with jollity.
"My dear Ned, you're most disappointing," the newcomer stated, with
burlesque complaint and a gesture that sent his hands far apart.
"You ought to be putting the last touch to a tuft of grass in the
foreground. It's a poor foreground that won't stand a few extra tufts
here and there, and it's an immensely effective proceeding. Or else
you ought to be on your knees to the gods. You're neither posing
piously to please Providence, nor patently to please Paris. I'm afraid
we've overrated your genius. You'll never make a Whistler."
He laughed good-humoredly as he grasped Carrington's outstretched hand.
Robert Parker, yclept Bobbins, took life easily.
"I'm so happy, Bobbins," Carrington confided in him, "that I can't even
think. Isn't it ripping--going east with Velantour?"
"It is for you, Rising Genius," Bobbins assured him, "but so far as I
am concerned, though I might manage to sit under a Kashmirian cedar
with a fan, standing on an icy peak with a pot of paint strapped to my
waistband, and a fault-finding old gentleman to tell me how badly I was
using it, isn't my ideal of bliss. No Himalayas for me."
"Bless you, Bobbins, we're not contracting to paint them by the yard,
the way you do a fence," expostulated Carrington, laughingly. "We're
going to make pictures, not advertise breakfast foods."
"What is your sister going to do?" queried Bobbins.
"Elenore is going to Brittany to-morrow with the Waldens," Carrington
told him promptly.
"And Hastings, I presume, has always wanted to go to Brittany," Bobbins
laughed.
"Well, Hastings has certainly developed a sudden enthusiasm in that
direction," Carrington acknowledged.
"Do you suppose Elenore----" Bobbins began mysteriously.
"I know enough to know that I don't know anything about girls,"
Elenore's brother announced, promptly. "Do you suppose Hastings----"
"I certainly do," said Bobbins, fervently. "And he has a bad case of
it. Wouldn't go to the _Bal Bullier_ the other night; thinks _cafes
chantants_ are vulgar; doesn't hear what you are saying half the time,
and has taken to humming 'Home-keeping hearts are happiest.' You don't
have to take him to the hospital to see what's the matter with him."
"I told him distinctly _by the hour_," a high-pitched, patrician voice
floated in from the hall, "and if he doesn't stop swearing he'll have
to put his _pourboire_ in troches." Coincident with the remark a fluent
outburst of Parisian profanity came wafting in the open windows.
"My dear Ned," said Mrs. Van Velt, the owner of the patrician voice,
appearing in the doorway; "would you mind sending some one to
chloroform my cabby? The more Carol argues with him, the more vocal he
becomes. He seems to think that they also swear who only sit and wait."
Mrs. Van Velt was a dowager unmistakably American.
She appeared to have been poured into her black satin gown at some
abnormally high temperature and at a calculation perilously close. Her
gray pompadour strained back from her high forehead in an apparent
endeavor to oust her bonnet as an insolent trespasser on its private
domain, but the bonnet, a black octopus with an intelligent jetty eye,
wound two narrow black velvet tentacles firmly beneath Mrs. Van Velt's
double chin, and triumphed calmly.
"You go, Bobbins," said Carrington, gayly. "Mrs. Van Velt, may I
present Mr. Parker? Chloroforming cabbies is one of his specialties.
You may be sure that it will be painless and thorough."
"And bring back my daughter, Mr. Parker," said Mrs. Van Velt, as
placidly as though she had said spectacles or handkerchief. The
obliging young knight was already half way to the door. "Carol thought
she ought to argue it out with him; and as she couldn't understand his
French, and he couldn't understand hers, it seemed perfectly safe."
She laughed good-humoredly.
"That's a nice-looking boy, Ned," she said, as the subject of her
remark disappeared. "Who is he, and how did he get such a remarkable
name?"
"Bobbins?" said Carrington. "Oh, he's a trump. His father is the
inventor--no, his grandfather--of Parker's Peerless Sewing Machine.
You know all the advertisements say: 'Observe the bobbin. So simple, a
child can work it.' And Robert the Third is such a generous chap, he's
an awfully easy mark. So--Bobbins."
His hands turned palms upward in an explanatory gesture.
Mrs. Van Velt laughed again. Then she put a hand on Carrington's
shoulder with a touch that was almost motherly.
"Ned," she said, affectionately, "I wish your father could be here
to-day to see you before you go east. He'd be so proud of you. How long
is it since he has seen you and Elenore?"
"Six years," said Carrington. "Dear old dad! Not since he sent us
over here in Aunt Sarah's care, six years ago, when mother died. He's
intended to come every year, but there's always been something at the
mine to prevent it. Dad loves the struggle of business, you know."
"He loves his children, too," said Mrs. Van Velt, seriously. "It
must be lonely for him. And the mine is in such a forlorn little,
out-of-the-way place, 'way up there in northern Michigan."
"The mines situated right in the heart of Manhattan are pretty well
worked out," Ned expostulated, humorously.
"Yellow Dog! Did you ever hear such a ghastly name?" Mrs. Van Velt went
on. "Half the people thought your mother was crazy when she married
him and went out there to live. They said he was harnessing Psyche to
his mine machinery for motive power. And the other half said that when
he was tired and wanted sympathy she'd write him a sonnet. Everybody
agreed that they would be unhappy. And they were the happiest people I
ever knew."
"They certainly were," said Carrington, emphatically. "How do you
account for it?"
"Modern prophets have a horror of the country," said Mrs. Van Velt,
sententiously, "unless it's in easy motoring distance of Sherry's. And
they overlooked the vital fact that when you're making two human beings
one, duplicate good qualities are quite as useless as duplicate wedding
presents.
"It's curious," she continued, "about you twins: that Elenore has all
her father's love of adventure and his executive ability, for all
her girlishness; and you have your mother's talent and her tastes.
You couldn't be more different, and yet you look as much alike as you
did when you were tots. I remember the first time your mother brought
you east. Your Uncle Dick--well, your Uncle Dick thought rock-and-rye
a splendid tonic for other people, but personally he took it without
the rock, which he thought might be indigestible--and he looked at you
both as you stood there side by side. And he said: 'Bring on your blue
ribbons. I can see two of them.'"
"Why, Mrs. Van Velt, and so early in the day, too!" said a gay voice
behind her, a voice so like Carrington's that it seemed his echo; and
Elenore Carrington came forward to kiss the dowager on both cheeks.
As Mrs. Van Velt had said, the resemblance between the twins _was_
remarkable.
They had the same height, the same coloring, the same blue eyes
that had a trick of turning violet under emotion; the same delicate
arch to the eyebrows; the same wavy line of hair upon the forehead;
the same buoyant poise of body. Even a certain quick suppleness of
motion belonged to them both; and, stranger still, their hands were
wonderfully like.
The artistic impulse that gave to Ned's a certain femininity in
slenderness and taper fingers was curiously balanced by a strain of
resourcefulness which lent to Elenore's well-shaped white palms so
strong a resemblance to her twin's that it was only by putting them
side by side and noting that hers were a bit smaller, a shade more
femininely modeled, a trifle more delicately cushioned, that they were
distinguishable.
The black locks that Carrington permitted to wave back just enough for
picturesqueness, with no trace of the bizarre or of unkemptness, gave
to his face a boyishness that carried a suggestion of eternal youth.
But Elenore's dark hair was coiled low in the nape of her neck, and her
manner was as feminine as was her distinctly smart and frilly pale
blue chiffon frock.
"I'm glad," Elenore went on, chaffingly, "that Aunt Sarah is safely on
her way to the North Cape and cannot hear you describe your shocking
condition."
"Bless you, child," said Mrs. Van Velt, promptly. "You're altogether
too good-looking. You ought to wear a veil. That's what young Hastings
thinks, I hear. He's confided in Carol. And anyone who would confide in
Carol must be laboring under strong mental excitement. And so your Aunt
Sarah has really started for the North Cape! Women as plain as Sarah
Moore are always pretending to be absorbed in the beauties of nature,
but they are really trying to get their own minds and yours away from
such sensitive subjects as snub noses."
"Where is Carol?" demanded Elenore, laughingly. "Isn't she coming to
say good-by to Ned and me?"
"Carol seems to be putting in a stitch in time with that young sewing
machine," said Mrs. Van Velt, unperturbed. "She's like her father. He
never could bear to see machinery idle."
Elenore looked up at her smilingly from the place she had taken at the
tea table. The samovar was steaming gayly, and the girl's white hands
moved with housewifely deftness as she prepared to make tea. They were
firm, capable hands, that it was a pleasure to watch.
The portieres swung back with a decided flourish to admit a short,
bright-eyed, gray-headed, animated old gentleman, who came forward with
the buoyancy of a boy.
"Here I am, _cher_ Edouard," cried Velantour, gayly. "_Mademoiselle,
mes hommages_, I come _expres_ to assure you that I shall take the bes'
of care of this brother of yours."
"Mrs. Van Velt," said Carrington, putting his hand affectionately on
old Velantour's arm, "I present to you Monsieur Velantour, the master
of painting in France."
"Madame," said Velantour, courtly in turn, "I presen' to you Monsieur
Edouard Carrington, a _nouveau maitre_ of whom America will one day be
very proud.
"You have a daughter, madame?" he added, gravely.
"Somewhere," said Mrs. Van Velt, calmly.
"_C'est ca!_" said Velantour. "I fall over two young peopl' in the hall
as I enter--young Monsieur Parker and a young lady--and the young lady
say: 'Oh, Monsieur Velantour, will you tell mother I'll be in in a
minute?' And Monsieur Parker say: 'So soon as she have finish' winding
the bobbin.'"
"It's all right, Mrs. Van Velt," said Carrington, amusedly. "Bobbins is
decidedly an eligible."
"What is that, an eligible?" demanded Velantour, puzzled to know what
could justify such calm.
"Well, in America, Monsieur Velantour," Mrs. Van Velt informed him, "an
eligible is an attractive man entirely surrounded by daughters--other
people's daughters."
"When mother begins to talk about other people's daughters it's always
time for me to appear," announced Miss Carol Van Velt, entering gayly.
Bobbins, radiant, was just back of her; and a tall, serious,
thoroughbred young fellow followed them.
Carol Van Velt was a remarkably pretty blonde, who looked delightfully
_ingenue_, but was entirely capable of managing most masculinity. She
accepted admiration as nonchalantly as she did bonbons, and considered
that the sources of supply of both were unlimited. Experience seemed to
prove that this theory was correct.
"_We_ saw, anyway, that we were just being used as stepping-stones to
higher things," she went on; "so we thought we might as well come in
with Mr. Hastings."
She sank gracefully down on one end of a large divan, and drew her
skirts aside with a gesture that assumed matter-of-factly that Bobbins
would occupy the other half of the seat. He justified the conclusion
with a promptness which left no doubt that he regarded it as a
heaven-sent opportunity.
"Not that we minded being an angels' ladder," he asserted, cheerfully,
"but I thought from Hastings' cast of countenance that he might be
going to give you a few scenes from 'Hamlet,' and I didn't think it
was safe to be sitting behind a curtain when he got to that part about
_Polonius_."
Velantour regarded them with that awe which a Frenchman must feel
for the rollicking frivolity of the American young and the placid
inefficiency of the American parent.
Meantime Hastings had made his way to Elenore and slipped into a vacant
chair by the tea table, as a matter of course.
She smiled at him very charmingly.
"You're late," she said, "and you were coming early, you know. Do you
think you deserve caravan tea with a dash of burgundy in it?"
"I think I deserve all the good things I can get to-day," he said, and
though his tone was light, there was an undertone that suggested that
he meant it.
"It tastes to me more like burgundy with a dash of caravan tea," said
Mrs. Van Velt. "After a while they will forget to put in the tea at
all."
"And then, Monsieur Velantour?" said Carrington, amusedly; for the old
Frenchman was sipping the mixture cautiously.
"Then it will not need mademoiselle's hands to make it perfection,"
said Velantour, with a humorous twist of his keen old lips.
His gray eyes gleamed as they applauded him laughingly. Age had
intensified in him the love of appreciation which is innate in the
Gallic heart.
"While we have tea, let us have toast," said Bobbins, promptly. "I
propose a toast to Monsieur Velantour. Turn it into rhyme, Ned. You're
a crack _improvisatore_."
Carrington stood up, with the easy grace of an Italian. He had the
temperament of a troubadour, and he loved in turn a compliment.
"To Monsieur Velantour" (he began) "whose name
Is but a synonym for fame----"
He had the _improvisatore's_ trick of lingering on the final syllable
until it brought its own suggestion.
"Bravo!" they applauded him; while Velantour enjoyed the adulation with
the frankness of a child.
"So irresistible that Art" (he glanced with gay raillery at Velantour)
"Quite womanlike, has lost her heart.
Yet knows it in his keeping, sure.
A health to Monsieur Velantour!"
They drank it in hilarious mood.
Velantour was on his feet the next instant.
"If I could but make one littl' Americain verse," he implored,
expansively. "But I speak so poorly. You mus' help me a littl'."
"Well," said Mrs. Van Velt, practically, "you have to begin with the
street he lives on, or something like that. _Rue Boissonade_----" she
began, and halted.
"Shall have its Claude," suggested Bobbins.
"_Bon!_" cried Velantour. "Now I have it.
"_Rue Boissonade_
Shall have its _Claude_,
And _l'Amerique_
The new _Van Dyck_."
His _naif_ delight was contagious.
He patted Carrington's arm affectionately.
"But we shall paint, _cher_ Edouard!" he said, fondly. "And you are
quite ready?"
"More than ready," laughed Carrington.
He glanced at the little clock on the mantel.
"And our train goes in just two hours," he whispered, triumphantly.
"Till then," said Velantour, gayly. Then he crossed over to Elenore.
"Mademoiselle, I will guard your brother as though he was--what is mos'
perishable in English--a bubbl', is it not? Madame"--he bowed to Mrs.
Van Velt. "Mademoiselle"--he inclined to Carol. "In two littl' hours,"
he called to Carrington from the doorway, and was gone.
"Isn't he the dearest thing?" Carol demanded, frankly, of Bobbins.
"He's an old brick, but not my idea of the dearest thing," that
discriminating individual replied, promptly. "I don't suppose you
could guess what my idea would be," he insinuated.
"Oh, that's too much of an antique," said Miss Van Velt, with crushing
promptness.
"Antique! I bought it this year," said Bobbins, tacking, unharmed.
"Then some one is selling you back numbers," Miss Van Velt assured him.
"Try to get your money back. It's been taking candy from children, and
it ought to be stopped."
"The police won't give it back," said Bobbins, mysteriously.
"The police!" said Miss Van Velt, startled. "What have they to do----"
"With my Mercedes?" said Bobbins, cheerfully. "That's just the attitude
I've tried to take with them. But it has cost me five hundred francs
this week, and this is only Wednesday. The dearest thing on earth to me
is Mercedes, my Mercedes," he hummed, pathetically.
"You naturally would lavish your young affection on machines," Miss Van
Velt remarked, cruelly, but she gave him a look of decided favor.
"So long as you think I am in the running," said Bobbins, placidly.
The maid had brought in a letter with an American postmark. Carrington
held it in his hand as he crossed over to join the group around the tea
table.
Mrs. Van Velt was enjoying her usual volubility, and Hastings was
paying her the flattery of an apparent attention and a comprehendingly
amused smile, while his eyes gave the deeper homage of frequent and
involuntary glances to Elenore.
For him, at least, Elenore was the central figure. Nor was it only for
him. Things were quite apt to gravitate around Elenore. Ned himself did
not overshadow his twin. If there is any truth in theosophic theories,
she had an unusually powerful aura; if we discard the esoteric for
the exoteric, beauty and wit and reserve force, cast in the mold of
an alluring femininity, are quite as attractive as the same buoyant
youth, plus tremendous talent, in masculine fiber.
Elenore had, too, a certain firm, keen grasp on the realities of life
which Carrington, with all his localized talent, lacked. One felt that
she would not fail in any qualm, that she would not be daunted by any
obstacle, that in crises she would think not of surrender or sacrifice,
but of resource and expedient.
Mrs. Van Velt was concluding her story of a recent tea given for a
famous woman novelist.
"_Did_ she talk about her work?" she exclaimed. "She never got away
from her books, and she drenched us with her successes until our ardor
was more than dampened. It was soaked. She gave us to understand
that she had Browning beaten on obscurity, Ibsen on subtlety, and
Maeterlinck on imagination. And when she left there was a heavy silence
for a minute, and then Alec Carter said: 'Now let's talk nursery rhymes
for a while. We might begin on "Little _bas bleu_, come blow your
horn."'"
She made her adieux on the strength of that, collecting her purse, her
feather boa and her daughter from different parts of the room, with
surprising promptitude.
It was her practice to save her best rocket for the last, and disappear
in the glory of its swish.
Bobbins accompanied the Van Velts to their carriage, and, to misquote
long-suffering Omar, once departed, he returned no more.
Carrington turned to Hastings the moment they were out of the door.
"You'll excuse me if I read dad's letter, won't you? My time is getting
so short," he said, apologetically; and went over to one of the long
windows to get the benefit of its light.
Elenore turned to Hastings with the question that had been hovering on
her lips for the last half-hour.
"Tell me why you are so serious," she said. "Has anything gone wrong?
It doesn't mean that you are not coming to Brittany to see the Waldens
and--me--this summer, does it?"
"It means a great deal more than that," said Hastings, soberly.
"Yesterday I thought I was on my way to being a rising architect.
To-day I am simply cast into outer darkness. The shears of fate have
clipped this piece of my life short, and I can't see what the next is
going to be like."
"Tell me," said Elenore, quietly.
"It's grotesquely simple," said Hastings, and there was an involuntary
tinge of bitterness in the tone he tried to keep even. "My uncle, who
has given me my start in life--the only relative I have--has written me
to come back to New York at once. I'm to give up being an architect.
When it's the only thing I am fitted for! He has something else for
me. He doesn't explain what. He does vouchsafe the information that
the place is quite impossible, but, he says, what are a few years out
of a young man's life?" His voice was a trifle unsteady. Years seemed
eternity to him just then.
"I must go, of course, unquestioningly," he went on, holding himself in
check. "Considering that I owe him everything, it's a military command.
And I have no right to say anything but good-by to--to any woman. I'm
out of things, that's all."
So much, at least, he vowed he would tell her; but he was determined
that he would not be so weak as to ask her to wait for him.
The years of his uncle's bounty fettered him hopelessly. When he knew
where he stood, when he had something definite to offer her, then--but
not till then. But it was bitter. He had supposed, of course, that he
would go back in the autumn, open an office, be self-supporting, and
then----
It was a few seconds before Elenore spoke. When she did her voice was
cheerful and friendly.
"There is always something interesting in the most impossible places,"
she said. "It may be rather fun. And we shall expect you to make it as
picturesque as possible in your letters, if we tell you all the gossip
here in exchange."
He said to himself that she understood, at least. He thanked Heaven
for that, as youth is prone to thank Heaven when Heaven lives up to its
expectations. And if the place was not so very impossible--_if_--and
_perhaps_----
So hope began to whisper. And then because If and Perhaps were all
he could take with him, because she was so winsome and dear and so
desirably human, because she was so daintily proud, and because the
things he was not to tell her refused to be held back, he caught
her hands in his, whispered: "God bless you! I shall write you
everything--that I can," and, wrapping his New England conscience round
him, went without a backward glance.
Elenore stood quite still for a moment. The shadows were beginning to
thicken in the long room, and she felt a certain restfulness in the
half-light.
Then she turned resolutely toward her brother. Something in the
dejection of his poise quickened her instantly.
"Ned! What is it?" she demanded.
"It's the deluge--without an ark," said Carrington, without stirring.
"Well?" said Elenore, tersely.
"I'm not going east with Velantour. I'm going home," he said,
mechanically.
"Not dad?" she said, breathlessly.
"No." He answered the unfinished question. "But he's broken his leg,
poor old dad! And other things are wrong, and he wants me."
"And me?" she questioned, quickly. "Doesn't he want me?"
"No," said Carrington, impatiently. "He wants his son, he says, and he
shall have me. And he shan't know I ever whimpered about coming. I'm
not cad enough for that. But going east with Velantour _is_ the chance
of a lifetime, and it takes a minute or two to get heroic about giving
it up, that's all. All except that it's bitter to think how little
use I shall be to him when I get there, for it's partly business,
and I haven't a particle of business ability. That will be _his_
disappointment, which is bitterer still."
"Do you mean to say that he doesn't want me?" Elenore demanded. "Where
is the letter?"
Carrington held it out to her without a word.
Dear Ned (it read), I'm sorry to call you home, but I must. I'm
laid up with a broken leg--compound fracture. Don't be alarmed. I'm
in no danger of dying. But there are business complications I want
to talk over with you--things it's only fair to you to let you help
decide. It may be only for a few weeks. Then you can go back. Let
Elenore stay in Paris. It's all man's work to be done here. Just
responsibilities to be met.
Your father,
Ned Carrington was turning over the pages of the morning _Herald_.
"I can catch the train for London in an hour, and sail from Liverpool
tomorrow, or--no, here it is--I can leave here in the morning and get a
boat at Boulogne. That will be better," he planned.
"And Velantour?" Elenore questioned.
He threw out his hands despairingly.
"I'll drive to the station and tell him," he said. "Then I'll come back
and unpack--and pack."
"Why can't I go to dad instead of you?" Elenore demanded.
"Because it's man's work to be done," said Carrington, impatiently.
"Don't argue it. I wish I had your brains for it, though. But it's me
that dad wants, and what he wants he shall have."
"Two people are going to America who don't want to go in the least.
But they are men, and so, presumably, useful," she said, spiritedly.
"And the one person who would really like to go can't; because she is a
woman, and so, presumably, useless." She flung her head backward a bit
impatiently as she looked at her twin. He was fumbling among the papers
on his desk; and the long mirror above it showed his face flushed and
perturbed and boyish. Then she caught sight of her own in the glass,
and started.
"There isn't a pen here," Ned said, irritably. "I must send dad a
cable."
"There's one in my room," she said, and her tone was full of energy and
spirit. "Get it, while I tell Berthe to run for a cab, and you can take
the message to the office on your way to tell Velantour."
Her hand was on the bell as he disappeared. She had snatched up paper
and pencil the next second, and was dashing off a note.
"Berthe," she said, as the little maid hurried in, "you are to go for
a cab, and see that it gets here in just fifteen minutes precisely;
not before, mind. Tell the _cocher_ that he shall have five francs
_pourboire_ if he is exact."
"_Bien_, mademoiselle," said the little maid.
"Post this note to Mrs. Walden, and come back with a second cab in
twenty-five minutes, without fail. Either my brother or myself will
give you your last instructions for the summer."
"_Bien_, mademoiselle," said the little maid--as she would have said it
to any command short of murder.
She sped out, pleasingly stimulated by the silver coin in her palm.
"Has she gone?" demanded Ned, feverishly, as he reappeared with the pen.
"Yes," said Elenore. "Write your message and read it off to me when
you've done it, will you? I want to tuck some things into the bag
that's going to America."
She nodded, smilingly, as she sped into his room.
Carrington sat down with a stifled groan. The sweetness had gone out of
life. It was duty now. Say what you will, six years' absence loosens
ties of blood; and though he was ashamed to confess it himself, it was
with a lagging loyalty that he thought of going home.
His whole life had been bent in one direction, and this abrupt break
demanded a heroism which he resolved to simulate, at least. But he need
not begin yet.
He could make his little moan to himself for this instant when he was
alone.
He dipped the pen in the ink.
The first sheet of paper blotted hopelessly. And the second. The
fingers that held a brush with unfaltering and delicate touch were
clumsily nervous now.
John Carrington, Yellow Dog, Mich, (he got down). Am coming first
boat.
"What was the boat?" he demanded of himself, and helplessly turned back
to the _Herald_ for information.
_Kaiser Wilhelm_ sailing Cherbourg tomorrow.
Then he dropped his face in his hands.
The written words seemed to make the thing so irrevocable.
He pulled himself together and walked nervously over to the window.
Where on earth _was_ the cab? It was a comfort to vent irritability on
something.
Then he roved over to the trunk he had packed with such forethought.
He laughed a little bitterly.
"Poor old Velantour! He will be disappointed, too," he whispered. "But
of the two old men who love me, one has to go to the wall. And it
shan't be dad."
He tramped up and down restlessly until he heard the sound of wheels.
Then he called to Elenore.
"I am going now."
"Not in this cab, you are not," her voice answered him. "This is mine.
Yours will be here in ten minutes, and you will have lots of time then."
"What?" he called, halfway to the door, and not believing his ears.
The door swung open, and in it he saw--himself.
Clad in loosely hanging dull gray velveteens, with a soft cravat the
color of pigeon blood. Over his arm a long crimson-lined cape hung,
half-concealing a suit case. The face, which was his, laughed at him
triumphantly, and shook its dark hair, worn a trifle long, back from
the forehead.
In the disencumbered hand a soft felt hat waved him back with a dash of
bravado.
"Tell Berthe what you please when she comes with your cab," his own
voice cried gayly. "I've just time to catch the London train. You are
for the east, I believe." Then, as he stood thunderstruck, his double
laughed exultantly.
"There's a letter, with copious details, on your dresser," the
apparition stated, with a lilt of pure joy of escapade. "Considering
the shortness of the time, I think I've been marvelous in thinking out
all possible exigencies."
And to his gesture of protest, of incredulity: "Don't argue! You
are to live the life you care for, for your three wonderful months,
and so shall I. It's not sacrifice. It's selfishness. I want to go
desperately. And I'll write you here--volumes. You'll find them when
you get back."
Then that voice which was his, and was not his, chanted saucily:
"Rue Boissonade
Shall have its Claude,
And l'Amerique
The new Van Dyck;
But Carrington
Shall have his son."
The doorway was empty. He heard a _cocher_ crack his whip, and a
cab-horse evidently making record time. Five francs, _mon Dieu, ca vaut
la peine_!
Ned Carrington stood bewildered. What should he do? He might follow
her--might make a scene--but he was always worsted when Elenore became
daintily willful. She was quite capable of carrying it off, too. And it
_was_ a lark!
A cab came clattering up the little street. The call of the East came
to him with an overpowering lure. A wave of joy swept over him that
he _could_ go, after all. He felt a fury of impatience to be off. He
grudged the time to give Berthe her instructions, to snatch Elenore's
letter from the dresser, to catch up his hat and coat. The mere thought
to do these things should be enough. But Berthe's willing feet were
speeding up the stairway. He flung the rug from his more-than-ready
trunk, and laughed as he touched the strap caressingly with his fingers.
"I'm going!" he whispered; and the words sung themselves to the rhythm
of rapture unalloyed.
"_Et puis, m'sieu?_" said Berthe, breathlessly, from the doorway.
The case of the old-fashioned watch snapped together for the fortieth
time in John Carrington's restless hands, and he sighed impatiently.
Not since those days of dread loneliness after his wife's death, when
he had first sent the children abroad, had time dragged so rackingly.
His leonine, iron-gray head moved irritably among the pillows of the
bed where he had been "caged," as he called it, for three interminable
weeks.
Mrs. Kipley, tidying up the room with an accentuation of her usual
briskness, gave him as indulgent a look as the formation of her rigid
cast of countenance would permit.
"Wearin' out your watch case won't hurry up that train none," she
observed, as she straightened a china cat on the mantel into an
expectant attitude.
It had been her gift the previous Christmas to John Carrington, and her
admiration of it extended to the hope that it would pleasingly impress
the returning traveler.
"Miss Elenore was fondest of animals, though," she murmured, absently.
John Carrington's eyes twinkled appreciatively. He did not share Mrs.
Kipley's admiration for her feline gift.
"Ned will appreciate that cat, though, Mrs. Kipley," he said, genially.
"You know he's been studying _art_;" but with the word a shadow came
over his face.
"It's hard on the lad, bringing him back," he said. "Yellow Dog will
look pretty crude to him, I expect."
He moved his head restlessly, and the leg in its swinging splint became
more exasperatingly painful.
Of course it would be only natural for Ned to have grown away from
home ties. It was an unspoken thought against which he had braced
himself for all these ten days. If the boy came back half-heartedly,
contemptuous of the place, indifferent to the mine, alienated from his
father--that was the touch of the thumbscrew.
And yet, he told himself wearily, six years was a long time. The boy
was talented, cultured, used to all the refinements of an older
civilization. What wonder if---- And if he, through love for his
son, and carrying out his mother's wishes for his future, had been
responsible for the separation which might mean all this?
Ah, well, he was not the first father, nor the last, to think out these
same things, and try to see them dispassionately.
"He was real spry about starting," said Mrs. Kipley.
John Carrington's face relaxed.
"Caught the first boat," he said. Then "Is his room ready and
comfortable?" he demanded, as he had demanded many times.
"I wouldn't worry about that room none, if I was you," said Mrs.
Kipley, serenely.
"Did you remember about the cigars and a decanter of whisky?" he asked.
Mrs. Kipley looked at him in a patient exasperation.
"They's two kinds of cigars, every brand of cigarettes Kipley could lay
hands on in Yellow Dog, the biggest decanter full of whisky, the motto
'Love One Another,' that my Sunday-school class worked for me last
winter; red-white-and-blue soap in the soap dish, and two pincushions
with a French motto worked on each of 'em. Hemmy did 'em in black and
white pins. She thought't would make it seem more like Paris to him.
One says '_Vive Napoleon_,' and the other says '_Veuve Cliquot_.' Kind
of twins, you see."
John Carrington's mouth twitched. Then he frowned slightly. For
would the boy understand? If he were not amused--if he were merely
contemptuous!
"Hemmy's picking some flowers for the house now," Mrs. Kipley went on,
serenely. "And Kipley's took a saddle horse besides the road wagon,
so's if Mr. Ned wanted to ride over, he could."
The case of John Carrington's watch came open once more. If the
train was on time, and Ned did choose the saddle horse, another ten
minutes---- But would he? The lad was a bit of a dandy. Carrington
had smiled indulgently over some of his tailor's bills. Probably you
couldn't coax him on a horse, even in Yellow Dog, unless he was arrayed
in all the proper paraphernalia.
But what was that clatter of horse's hoofs--fast and furious--faster
and more furious than any Yellow Dog had heard since the day three
weeks ago when the Carrington team, terrorized by a small boy's
premature bunch of firecrackers, had run away, and John Carrington,
thrown from the wreckage of his light buggy, had been brought home with
a badly fractured leg?
Mrs. Kipley looked out of the window.
"Merciful sakes!" she ejaculated, startled.
Not an accident to Ned, John Carrington prayed, with stiff, dry lips
and apprehensive eyes.
"Of all things!" Mrs. Kipley murmured; and her tone indicated that she
was now past surprise, and merely numbered with the numb.
Some one was running up the veranda steps; the door was flung open, and
a tall, dark, slender boy in a marvelous suit of dull gray velveteens
stood on the threshold.
A long, crimson-lined cape was flung over his arm. He tossed it from
him. And "Dad!" he cried, exultantly, and was across the room, with his
arms around his father's neck, and had kissed him on both cheeks.
"French fashion, dad!" he laughed, flushing suddenly.
"Now we'll do it the Anglo-Saxon way;" and he caught both his father's
hands in his own and wrung them heartily. "It's great to be home
again," he said, buoyantly.
And the joyful light in his eyes was unmistakably genuine.
John Carrington's face softened amazingly. Happiness such as he had not
known for six years gripped him. The warm ardor of his son's embrace,
the touch of the soft, boyish lips, unnerved him, but he liked it
astonishingly. It was so naif, so unspoiled, so reassuring against that
dread of alienation he had endured, that he felt submerged in the warm,
comfortable certitude of his son's affection. He gripped the lad's
hands strongly, and surveyed him with a proud, fatherly interest.
The blue eyes that looked frankly into his own were like the lad's
mother's, like Althea's; the face that smiled gayly at him was alight
with youthful energy, and the mouth, though the lips were a trifle
full, had firm and resolute lines.
It was no dawdling dreamer that he saw, but an action-lover.
He nodded satisfiedly.
"You'll do, lad," he said, briefly.
Then he smiled as he caught sight of Mrs. Kipley, standing with the
rigidity of an automaton, dust cloth in hand.
"You remember Mrs. Kipley," he said, significantly. The boy wheeled
instantly.
"Don't I!" he said, laughingly, and something in his advance galvanized
Mrs. Kipley into life again.
"None of your French fashions with me," she said, severely, extending
her right hand to him, less in greeting than as a rampart.
He swept a wonderful bow over it. Bent to it as a courtier might have
done, and kissed its wrinkled, work-hardened back lightly. Then he
straightened up to look her full in the eyes, and laughed his bubbling
laugh once more.
"Do you still make those wonderful twisted doughnuts, Mrs. Kipley?" he
asked, gayly. "I've bragged about them in Paris till they're famous."
Mrs. Kipley was scrutinizing the back of her hand minutely, to see if
it was still intact. Finding it apparently uninjured, she drew breath
and looked the surprising apparition in the face. Her own relaxed to
his handsome, dashing youth and to his praise.
"I guess they're about the same," she said, dryly. But John Carrington
chuckled to himself. He recognized the subjugation of Mrs. Kipley.
"What will he be with the young women!" he commented, to himself,
amusedly.
Then he asked the question that was consuming Mrs. Kipley:
"Ned, are those clothes the _style_ in Paris?"
The boy swung himself lightly into the big armchair beside the bed.
"They're the badge of my craft, sir," he said, good-humoredly, settling
the soft cravat with deft fingers. "Don't you like them?"
"Oh, _I_ like them," said John Carrington. ("Handsome lad!" he was
whispering to himself, proudly.) "But I was wondering how they would
strike Yellow Dog, that's all."
"There did seem to be some little interest in my arrival," the lad
admitted, gleefully.
"Sakes alive! They beat anything I ever see in all my life!" Mrs.
Kipley communed with herself.
"And Elenore?" said John Carrington. "How did you leave Elenore?"
The boy stirred slightly in his chair.
"Elenore is well, dad. She wanted to come. I think she was a little
disappointed that you didn't want your daughter instead of your son."
John Carrington shook his head.
"Yellow Dog is no place for a young lady, Ned," he said. "It was better
for her to stay with her friends. I should have liked to see her,
though. She's quite a woman, from her picture. Time for sweethearts,
eh? Your Aunt Sarah wrote a good deal about a young Hastings. She
seemed to think it might be serious."
The boy flushed annoyedly.
"Aunt Sarah loves to fuss and exaggerate," he said, and there was a
slight coolness in his voice. "Maiden aunts are apt to, you know," he
went on, more naturally. He smiled his attractive smile once more.
Whatever had perturbed him for the instant was past.
Miss Hematite Kipley, _aetat_ seventeen, coming into the room with a
fragrant bowl of syringa blossoms, compared it favorably with any
picture her beloved romancers had been able to conjure up.
From the moment when she had seen the picturesque figure dismount and
make a rapid way into the house, she had been perishing to make this
entrance, but she had restrained herself in accordance with her ideas
of propriety and gentility. Miss Kipley strove to be "elegant," aided
by certain open columns in respected periodicals, after which she
patterned her conduct and her clothes.
The meeting between father and son she characterized as "a sacred
moment," and she regretted her mother's continued intrusion upon it
with the resigned exasperation of one who had often and fruitlessly
pointed out to a primitive parent the proper forms of procedure.
Miss Kipley was rather pretty in a wholesome, buxom, blond way, and the
"open columns" had stimulated her to a crisp freshness of attire, and
partially reconciled her to the maternal regulations of its enforced
simplicity.
She came into the room with her eyelids so demurely lowered that she
might have been taken for a sleepwalker.
"Good-morning, Hemmy," said John Carrington, with an outward courtesy
which marked an inward amusement. In spite of her physical bulk, Miss
Hematite was mentally transparent.
"Why, _Hemmy_!" said young Carrington, gayly, "how awfully pretty you
have grown!"
Miss Kipley felt an inward commotion which threatened suffocation. Her
fingers tightened on the blue bowl in a way which tested its enduring
qualities. Mrs. Kipley's maternal eye became vigilant.
There was a suggestion of a wrinkle on John Carrington's brow. He
hoped the boy would remember that this was not Paris; that the Kipleys
represented the survival of a good many New England traits.
But neither parent could find anything to criticise in the way the lad
relieved the blushing Hemmy of the bowl, shook her hand in a cordial,
unaffected way, and turned to set the white blossoms on the square
ledge of the open window, where the breeze converted them into a spicy
censer.
As for Hematite, though visibly she stood in a deep pink embarrassment,
in fancy she trod the sunny slopes of romance. This was the way things
happened in the books over which she pored, palpitant. She sought
vainly for some appropriate expression of welcome.
"I guess Hemmy and me will let you have a chance to get acquainted. I
can finish dusting by and by," said Mrs. Kipley, tersely. "Your old
room's all ready for you, Mr. Ned. Come, Hemmy."
That young person followed her mother mechanically from the room.
"Cat got your tongue?" inquired Mrs. Kipley, severely, in the hall.
"For all you are forever reading about the proper way to do things, you
can't even say 'Glad to see you back.'"
Miss Kipley looked down from the happy heights to which she had
mentally withdrawn herself, to the prosaic parent treading the valley
of plain realities.
"There are moments beyond words," she vouchsafed. Then she sped down
the garden path to the now sacred syringa.
Mrs. Kipley watched her from the doorway with an anxious air.
"I hope she ain't caught anything," she murmured. "That was a terrible
fool remark. I don't know what there is around just now for her _to_
catch."
But it is characteristic of the disorder which Miss Hematite had so
recently acquired that no one save the person afflicted knows it's
around till the case has taken.
The lad had slipped his fingers in his father's, and they sat a little
while in silence. So Althea and John Carrington had often sat, in that
silent communion which is the bond of the finest fellowship.
Mr. Abner Kipley, entering suddenly, with Ned's suit case in hand and
a desire to expatiate on recent events oozing from every pore, viewed
this singular proceeding as one further extraordinary manifestation
emanating from the same remarkable cause.
"Seems you _can_ teach an old dog new tricks," he communed with
himself. "Probably by to-morrow I'll be holding hands myself." He
chuckled grimly to himself over the impossible thought. But the glance
he gave the lad from under his shaggy eyebrows was unwillingly
admiring.
Yet Mr. Kipley prided himself on his unerring attitude of judicial
criticism.
The boy swung round in his chair to greet him smilingly.
"You walked over, Mr. Kipley, I assume," he said, mischievously.
"I didn't try to kill a horse 'n' get my neck broke," responded Mr.
Kipley, defensively.
"You picked up thet baby nice, though," he added, with the air of a man
willing to be just.
John Carrington looked at him with an air of sudden inquiry.
"It _was_ lucky," said the lad, languidly; and he lounged over to the
open window, as though the subject was finished.
"I'm goin' to," said Mr. Kipley, impatiently, to the growing insistence
of John Carrington's look.
He objected to being hurried in the narration of a story which he
rejoiced was his to tell.
"When he," he began, jerking his head in the lad's direction, "'lected
to ride the Colonel home, he threw that red-backed garmint"--no
mere black-and-white could reproduce the patronage of Mr. Kipley's
tone--"'cross the saddle in front of him. 'N' the Colonel, not being
used to the fashions in Paris, bolted. They went up the road's though
they was goin' to glory, 'n' didn't have but one chance to ketch the
limited. 'N' _I_ threw his grip in the wagon 'n' started after 'em.
"It was good ridin'," said Mr. Kipley, approvingly, "'n' everybody thet
could turned out to see it. It was interestin' and free.
"Thet curve by Trevanion's cottage is a mean place," Mr. Kipley
continued, reflectively. "I've run the team into several things there
myself, includin' a dog fight, which c'ncluded about the time we run
over the principal fighter's tail." He switched himself back on the
main track. "Thet baby of Trevanion's was tryin' to ketch a hen just as
the exhibition come along."
"Well?" said John Carrington, and his voice whistled like a pistol shot.
"Down with his arm, 'n' half out of the saddle--grab--'n' yank up--'n'
'bout face--hand the baby to a long-legged girl--'n' off he goes,
leaving me to destroy my c'nstitution, breathin' dust all the way home.
Thet's your son's idea of gettin' here," he concluded, dryly.
John Carrington drew a breath of relief.
"If anything had happened to that baby, we should have had the devil's
own time," he said. "Trevanion has been sullen ugly ever since his wife
died--took his trouble that way--and the baby is the only thing in the
world he cares for. If--well, we might have lost the best shift boss in
the country."
Young Carrington stood very still, looking out of the window. If the
incident had shaken him a bit, there was at least no outward sign of it.
Mr. Kipley drew nearer to the bed.
"There's good stuff in him," he said, semi-confidentially, as though
recent residence in a foreign land unfitted one to hear undertone, "'n'
grit. But, for the sake of Moses, get those clo's offen him."
Upon which advice, he retired hastily from the room.
John Carrington looked across the room at his son with a smile that was
at once quizzical and affectionate.
"Yellow Dog finds you a trifle too picturesque, boy," he said, and
his tone suggested that he at any rate was satisfied. "How about you?
Pretty big trial to come back?"
"I should have come, whether you sent for me or not, when I knew you
were hurt," said the boy, and there was a defiant little ring in his
voice. "Where should I be, or want to be, but at home and with you?"
John Carrington's heart beat proudly. This was the kind of son to
have. He said "home" as though he meant it. He was loyal. Now he, John
Carrington, had an heir to show to some people----
"I needed you," he said, quietly. "Not on account of this confounded
leg; though it's been hard to be shut up for the first time in my
life--hung up to mend, like a china plate. But it made me think I was
just mortal, after all. And of your future and Elenore's. And it's only
fair to you to let you decide how you'd rather have things."
The look the boy gave him now was a quiet, concentrated attention.
"Without going into details about our mine, that no one but a mining
man could understand," Carrington went on, with a restful security
engendered by that look, "I want to tell you the straight facts. It's
characteristic of this region that in sinking every now and then you
strike a big hole filled with water--a vug, they call it. Now, we
can take care of what we strike ourselves, but the Tray-Spot, which
is newer and shallower, is letting us take care of theirs. Instead
of pumping it up, they let the water seep through to the Star, and
_we_ lift it. It cuts off profits, and makes our mine dangerous. The
two mines ought to be under the same management, anyway. Expenses
could be cut almost in two. So I wrote the owner of the Tray-Spot--an
Easterner--never comes out here--to ask him what he'd sell for.
Richards, the superintendent, is a good deal of a scoundrel, and
responsible for all the trouble. Of course mining is just a business
proposition to those Easterners. They haven't fought things out here in
the early days, as some of us have. And this man had never even been on
the ground. Bought the mine from Riley when he went to smash. And he's
childless. No second generation to take it up.
"That's practically what I wrote him," Carrington went on, doggedly,
"and why it should have struck him just wrong, and turned him pig-head
and ugly is beyond me. But he wrote back that if he had never been
here, he wasn't too old to come now. And that if he didn't have a
son, he had a nephew, who was a first-class business man and smart as
a steel trap, whom he proposed to bring out here, and to keep on the
ground. And that, as he understood from his superintendent that the one
son _I_ had was spending his time in Paris studying art, the mines
would be better off with his heir than mine. And would I put a selling
price on the Star? The Star, that I've put my lifeblood into! And that
letter"--there was the rage of a wounded lion now--"was the first thing
they read me after I came out from the ether to find myself tied up
like--like this----" he finished, at a loss for any adequate comparison.
"We've got to fight or to sell," he finished, "and if anything happened
to me, what would you children know about disposing of it? That's what
I've thought as I've lain here. Hadn't I better leave things safe for
you, if I do have to kill time for a few years myself?"
His eyes looked worn. How many times he had gone over it! How many
times affection for his children had warred against his pride in the
mine he had discovered, developed, managed, owned! It all seemed a
part of long, restless nights, of narcotics and anodynes that brought
nightmares as often as oblivion; nights in which the young mine doctor
seemed mixed up with the obstinate Easterner who owned the Tray-Spot,
and the pain throbs and the pumping apparatus at the mine seemed to
have some curious relationship.
"Sell! Never!" the fresh young voice flung back instantly, and the
timbre of it was a battle-cry. "We'll fight, dad--for our rights first,
and then--then we'll buy!"
He stood erect, every curve of fine youthfulness buoyant with victories
to come, his head flung a trifle back and his mouth resolute.
Fatherly pride, exultation, triumph, swung John Carrington up on his
elbow from his pillows in a certain fierce joy, and something glistened
on his cheek--something that pain and fatigue and loneliness had never
crystaled there.
"I have a son to stand by me," he said, and it was the dignity of a
king to the crown prince.
The leonine old head was lifted proudly, and the hand that he stretched
out might have held a scepter.
Then reaction of the strain came swiftly, and the lad leaped to him,
as he dropped back limp and white against the pillows, with a sudden
film drawn over the eyes so lately keen of sight, and the rushing of
many waters in the ears that had heard so happily.
Yellow Dog was having the time of its life.
It was, to use a local idiom, passing out a new line of talk every day.
What this sudden access of interest meant to an isolated small town
which existed solely on account of its two mines one would have to live
in Yellow Dog to understand.
The Tray-Spot and the Star were at opposite ends of the town's main
street, each a local fetish in its way to the miners.
Underfoot everywhere the soft red hematite ore stained everything that
it touched.
Beyond, hills after hills covered with scraggy pine. Half a mile to the
south was the railway station, and a spur ran to both mines.
Since the loungers around that station had witnessed the home-coming of
young Carrington, conversation had flourished in dialects Cornish and
Irish and Swedish and "Dago," as well as that tongue to which its users
alluded proudly as "United States."
The first comment of all this polyglot assemblage had inclined toward
the critical, with emphasis which ran the gamut from the humorous to
the snarl, laid on what Mr. Kipley had characterized as "those dum
clothes."
Trevanion, shift boss, coming to the surface that first night, to learn
of the child's peril, heard it in silence and with smoldering eyes;
heard it sullenly as he held the child in his arms, and with a surly
nod went back to his cottage.
And the long-legged girl who told him resented his silence as a lack of
interest not only in the event, but in her narrative.
It was not often that anything so exciting happened. Events were
usually underground casualties in Yellow Dog. "'E could 'a' said 'e
was glad the child wasna killed," she complained to her father.
"'E'd na say what you maun know, onyway," she got for comfort; for the
men admired Trevanion, and trusted him blindly.
They comprehended, too, the way he had taken his trouble, and they left
him to himself, since he wished it. It was his way; just as it was his
way to read, to study, to get some beginnings of the patiently dug-out
education of a dully persistent man.
If he had lost his Cornish accent, save in excitement or in his orders
to them, he had not lost his Cornish patience, nor that curious Cornish
affinity between man and mine.
What they did not understand was the measure of his fierce love for his
child; the child that was to have a chance. This was the mainspring of
his life.
Trevanion was seated on his doorstep, with the child on his knee, when
young Carrington rode down the street once more, leisurely this time;
looking at everything with interested eyes that recognized the old and
familiar, and saw the new and changed, with a buoyant alertness which
seemed to match the careless grace of the way he sat his horse.
The boy Trevanion had used to see at play had grown up to this
lordliness, had he? To ride recklessly, careless of whom he ran down,
trusting to luck to snatch children from under his horse's feet.
Trevanion hated him.
He saw him rein in the Colonel to ask some question of a woman who was
leaning her elbows interestedly on her gatepost. Then young Carrington
came on to stop opposite him.
"You're just the man I'm looking for, Trevanion," he said, and his tone
was clear and crisp.
Trevanion got on his feet and looked at him loweringly. The child
smiled at him.
"One of these days, Trevanion, I'm going to let you give me a few
lessons in practical mining," he said, pleasantly. "I may decide
to become a mining man, after all. But that will have to go for the
present, and you may be thankful for it. I'm inclined to think you'd
find it harder work than being shift boss."
Trevanion looked at him unsmilingly.
"However," young Carrington went on, "they tell me you've never failed
in anything you've tried yet, and I'm sure you wouldn't begin with me.
I'm no record-breaker," he laughed, and there was something so pleasant
in its sound that Trevanion was furious to find that he liked it.
"No, soberly, Trevanion," he said, and his voice dropped to a
seriousness that was sweeter toned than even his laughter, "father
isn't quite so well to-day. We've got to keep him pretty quiet for a
few days, free from worry as much as possible; but we don't want the
men to know that. When he is up again we'll get after those Tray-Spot
people and put a stop to those free baths they've been good enough to
give us. But we've got to pull him up carefully for a while. It'll mean
extra work and responsibility for you."
Then a new note came in the musical voice.
"It means everything to the mine just now, Trevanion, that you are just
where you are, a man to be trusted."
The words were spoken with a grace which made them seem like a
decoration conferred. The eyes that Trevanion raised met deep blue
eyes with a mysterious something in them that conquered him. Fealty
was suddenly strong in him, loyalty to the lad through thick and thin.
Every fiber of his big burliness thrilled with a proud protectiveness.
The child on his arm was holding out his arms to young Carrington.
Three minutes before, his father would have resented it. Now he saw the
firm, sure, tender grasp with which Carrington took him up before him
on the saddle; he exulted in the child's laugh as the Colonel walked
off daintily, then took a bit of a canter down the street, and finally
young Carrington brought a reluctant two-year-old back to the fatherly
arms.
It was then that he said what he had had in his mind since
morning--said it with a tenderness that rang perfectly true:
"All I was thinking of this morning, Trevanion, was to get to my father
as soon as possible. But if my impatience had resulted in accident I
should never have gotten over it."
And Dick Trevanion, holding the little, warm, happy figure close in his
great arms, said what half an hour ago he had never thought to say:
"I believe you, Mr. Ned."
"Quiet!" said Mr. Kipley, to young Carrington's comment, as he sat
on the veranda steps that evening after dinner, looking with growing
approval at that young gentleman as he lounged in a big wicker chair.
"Well, of course, it tain't the Boo-lee-vards"--for Mr. Kipley
had consulted the encyclopedia painstakingly in order to converse
comfortably with the returning traveler. "It tain't the Boo-lee-vards,"
he repeated, with an air of erudition, "but there _are_ times when
Yellow Dog can have as big a pack of firecrackers tied to its tail as
you'd see anywhere."
"Yes?" said the boy, and it was a yes that coaxed. He was enjoying Mr.
Kipley hugely.
"Yes," said Kipley, placidly. "Day after pay-day occasionally, or
when the lumber-jacks come down from Raegan camp at Christmas time to
get their money and blow it in before New Year's." Then he chuckled
reminiscently.
"They're queer cusses," he said. "One of 'em came in last Christmas
that was a walkin' woolen store, 'n' when he tried to sell mittens and
stockin's by the hundred pair, they just naturally locked him up. But
he come by 'em honest, after all. You know," he explained, kindly,
"these lumber-jacks can't get any money while they are in the woods,
but they can trade at the company's store there, 'n' have it checked
against their time. 'N' they _will_ play poker. So they used mittens
'n' stockings for chips. 'N' this fellow had got most of 'em. He told
_me_," said Mr. Kipley, with intense enjoyment, "that he won eleven
hundred pair of mittens on three aces. The other fellow had kings. 'N'
he bluffed forty pair of stockings outen a greenhorn on ace high.
"You play poker?" he inquired, for young Carrington's laugh had been
deliciously prompt.
The boy nodded.
"Enough to appreciate a good poker story, anyway," he said. "That's a
corker."
Mr. Kipley wiped his mouth with his handkerchief to hide a pleased
smile.
"D'you know," he said, "Mis' Kipley can't see a thing in that story?"
His tone suggested a puzzled commiseration.
"Oh, well," the boy said, gayly, "it's hardly a woman's story, you
know." And he showed his white teeth in so gleeful a smile that it
warmed Mr. Kipley's heart.
It resulted in his making some inquiries on a subject that had roused
his interest earlier in the day.
"Paris is gettin' kind of run down, ain't it?" he asked, cautiously.
"Why, no," said the boy; "it's getting built up. What made you think
so?"
"They's a picture in the encyclopedia," said Mr. Kipley, "that I come
acrost to-day. What a lot a person would know who'd read 'em all
through!" he commented. "It was a cathedral--Catholic, I s'pose, 'n'
they're usually willin' to give liberal to keep up their buildin's,
too. It was pretty well timbered up the back, 's though they was
expecting a cave-_out_."
Young Carrington recognized the description with an inward joy.
"That's one of the most famous churches of Paris," he said, soberly.
"Notre Dame. And it was built that way on purpose."
"Do they _believe_ that?" Mr. Kipley inquired.
"Yes," said young Carrington.
"Who give it its name?" Kipley demanded.
"I really couldn't say," the boy laughed.
"It would be interestin' to know," reflected Mr. Kipley. "Of course
he wa'n't no kind of an architect, or he wouldn't have had to brace
his walls like that; but whether he had the gall to name it because he
didn't care a damn, or they named it because it wasn't worth a damn----"
"Your pa's waked up and wanted to know where you was," said Mrs.
Kipley, appearing in the door, just as young Carrington was trying to
decide whether to enlighten an ignorance which was such bliss to the
listener.
"Thank you," he said, and sped into the house at once.
Mr. Kipley turned a philosopher's eye upon the wife of his bosom.
"He's got good principles, M'r'," he said, with conviction; "'n' a very
entertainin' way of puttin' things. He's good company."
"What was he talkin' about?" asked Mrs. Kipley, interestedly.
Mr. Kipley's cough was extremely apologetic.
"Come to think of it, I guess I did most of the talkin'," he said, with
some embarrassment.
"I should say 't was likely," said Mrs. Kipley, dryly; and she
disappeared in the house. She reappeared for a parting shot. "I s'pose
his principles was good because he agreed with you," she observed,
sarcastically. Mr. Kipley gazed at the evening star confidentially.
"Beats all about women!" he mused. "They act's if all the principles
was theirs, 'n' kind of exasperated if you've got any. 'N' more if you
ain't," he murmured.
He had refilled his pipe, and was looking placidly across the lights of
the town to the hills beyond.
Hemmy came up the walk with the light of a new and lovely romantic
suggestion in her eyes.
She sat down beside her father and slipped a warm, plump hand in his.
"Pa," she said, sweetly, "am I really your child and ma's?"
Mr. Kipley recoiled sharply.
"Well, of all things!" he ejaculated.
Miss Hematite Kipley experienced a pang of disappointment.
She had just been reading a "perfectly lovely romance," where an
adopted child turned out to be the daughter of a duke. While she did
not insist on a dukedom, she had had an ecstatic feeling that she might
be a millionairess.
"You never brought me home in your arms and told ma that a beautiful
young gypsy girl----" she began, falteringly.
"No," said Mr. Kipley, with precision; "I never did, and that's the
reason I'm alive to-day. If I'd come home with a baby, talking about
beautiful young gypsies, there'd have been a funeral, and no mourners.
An 't would have served me right, too."
Then he softened parentally toward this young woman of his own flesh
and blood.
"It don't seem so very long ago, Hemmy, since you was born. Born in the
regular, genu-wine way. Why, we named you Hematite because they struck
the big find of ore in the mine that same morning. It was my idea,
too, for your aunt, who lived in the copper country, had just named
her little girl Amygdoloid--Amy, for short--and she was plum offensive
about having the most elegant name out. 'What's the matter with
Hematite?' says I!"
Miss Hematite kissed her undoubted parent forgivingly, and rose from
the ashes of her air castle like an undiscouraged young phoenix.
Already she had another in process of construction, and she pillowed
her cheek against the battered volume containing the encounter between
Cophetua and the beggar maid, though _he_ was not a king, and _she_ was
not pauperized. "I think, perhaps, it's even _sweeter_," she whispered,
as she fell asleep.
Down in the village of Yellow Dog, the club which the Star had built
for its miners was ablaze not only with lights, but with excitement.
There was a circle of miners around the room.
In the center of the floor lay a man who had been shaken into a little
heap of clothes; a heap that stirred with caution even in catching
breath, lest more punishment should follow.
Over it towered Dick Trevanion's sturdy figure, made brawnier still by
rage.
"Any more remarks about Mr. Ned and his clothes?" he demanded, sweeping
that quiet group with furious eyes.
There was not a breath from them. Trevanion's reputation as an athlete
and a boxer was a matter of local pride.
He walked across the room to the door and flung it open.
Then he turned his flushed face to them.
"You can all have as much and more, if you like," he said. "I stand for
him."
He struck the side of the door a blow with his closed fist, a blow that
seemed to shake the entire side of the room. "Remember that when your
tongues start," he emphasized, and was gone in the darkness.
There was no danger that they would forget.
In a quiet bedroom, the lad whom he had championed had fallen asleep in
a big chair beside his father's bed.
He had sat there till John Carrington had slept, and then, too drowsy
to move, had slept himself--that youthful sleep of healthy exhaustion.
John Carrington, waking in the night, looked at the boy as he rested
his head in the corner of the high-backed chair. The long, dark lashes
lay lightly on cheeks rounded daintily enough for a girl, but the lines
of the firm young chin had a quiet decision even now.
Far into the night John Carrington lay with open eyes resting on his
son, and in the depths of those eyes was content immeasurable.
The days stretched into weeks, weeks to months. It was September now.
John Carrington was almost convalescent.
He could walk now with a crutch from his bedroom to the veranda couch.
The bone had knit, but the flesh was slow to heal.
And what a comfort his son had been to him through those months!
Sunny. Tireless. Capable. Ready to read if he wanted to be read to; to
write letters when they had to be written; to amuse him with tales of
his life and Elenore's in Paris, when the pain was bad and time dragged.
And outside there was not a miner who did not speak boastingly of Mr.
Ned. Even Yellow Dog, noncommittal Yellow Dog, sang his praises.
Only the miners at the Tray-Spot sneered. Only their wives flung a
contemptuous laugh when young Carrington and the Colonel sped by out on
long rides through the country.
These rides, in whose solitude one might think one's own mind freely;
and certain letters that went overseas addressed to one E. Carrington,
to be held in Paris till called for, were the only relaxations in which
young Carrington permitted himself an entire honesty of thought.
One morning Mr. Kipley came home jubilant.
"Strangers in town," he announced. "Owner of the Tray-Spot, I guess,
and a young fellow. Saw them driving with Richards."
John Carrington rapped his crutch sharply against a chair.
"Now there's going to be something doing," he said, defiantly; and all
the repressed activity of months rang in the words.
Young Carrington waved a hand airily in the direction of the other mine.
"The Tray-Spot shall cease from troubling," he said, gayly, "and we'll
just gather you gently in."
If anything stirred the stillness, it was the mocking laughter of the
goddess of fate.
The brownstone house on Madison Avenue suggested the solid and
respectable affluence of its owner, Mr. Livingstone Wade, in that
quieter old New York way which preceded Millionaire's Row, and which,
on account of that precedence, Mr. Livingstone Wade considered
immeasurably superior.
Nor was this suggestion a mere exterior effect.
The somber elegance of its interior furnishings showed in every detail
that Mr. Wade's conservatism to earlier ideals was unfaltering.
The ormolu clock on the drawing-room mantel was flanked by a pair of
tall vases, Sevres, as a matter of course, standing equidistant with
the precision of sentinels.
His pictures included a Landseer, a Meissonier, a Bouguereau, and some
excellent copies of Raphael. He was fond of calling your attention to
the fact that all of these gentlemen could draw, and that their figures
"stood out."
The books in his library showed a strong tendency to run in sets, with
modern fiction conspicuously absent. And as for his dinner services,
they were complete, and he considered odd sets of plates as a fad which
had its origin in economy or inefficient housekeeping.
He rated _l'art nouveau_ with _nouveaux riches_, considered
impressionism as a cloak for defective draughtsmanship, declined to
admit anything made as far west as Rookwood to the companionship of the
Capodamonte and Meissen in his cabinets, and would have banished to his
stables the most priceless Indian basket ever made.
West of New York he considered that the wilderness howled, impelled
to such mournful vocalization by a dawning sense of its own abnormal
crudities.
In business, however, Mr. Wade consented to compromise with the
spirit of the times. No out-of-date methods characterized the bank of
which he was president, nor, on the other hand, did any up-to-date
crook contrive to outwit the keen-eyed, white-haired, thin-lipped old
gentleman, who held himself as erect ethically as he did physically.
His wife, born a Van Dorn, christened in Grace Church and married in
the same, had died at fifty-seven, childless--a course of conduct
which Mr. Wade, while he preserved a high silence, felt as deeply as a
European monarch might have done. It was not a mere personal question,
but the continuation of the Wade line would have been for the good of
the country at large.
As for his only nephew, he had done his duty by him. Not extravagantly,
to spoil the young man, or delude him with unfounded hopes of
heirship; but by a college course, Columbia _bien entendu_! and when
he determined to become an architect, the Beaux Arts was naturally the
only correct place.
When he read John Carrington's letter, with its phrase "since you have
no direct heir," Mr. Livingstone Wade experienced a very primitive
bitterness, which resolved itself into a determination to make his
nephew heir to that particular piece of property at least; to recall
him from Paris, and to insist upon his going out to Michigan and
becoming thoroughly conversant with the mine as soon as possible.
Having begun the accomplishment of this design, Mr. Livingstone Wade
began to feel a consciousness of benevolence in acting so generously
toward the young man, which resulted, very naturally, in his regarding
his nephew with more affection than even Mr. Wade himself would have
thought possible.
As they sat together in the well-ordered library, Mr. Wade said to
himself that he had done well.
"When the mine came to us with that tangle of collateral from the Riley
failure, I found that it was paying dividends regularly; and Richards,
the manager, wrote me that they could be doubled easily if he was
allowed a free hand to cut down expenses and exercise his own judgment.
He has done it, too, and the mine is a splendid property. And it is
yours, my boy, when you have made yourself thoroughly conversant with
it." Mr. Wade's tone was complacently benevolent.
"Do you mean that you want me to take a course in mining engineering?"
said Hastings, and his voice was carefully expressionless.
"No," said his uncle; "I want you to go out to the mine itself, put
yourself in Richards' hands, and get a good working knowledge of the
proposition, so that Richards will know you are master. He wouldn't
try any tricks with me, because it is pretty well known that men who
have tried have repented it; but with a young fellow like you, it's
different, of course. I shall not expect you to spend all your time
there. Perhaps for a year or so you'd better stay on the ground. Then
come East, open your architect's office, and go West once a year on a
tour of inspection."
Hastings' face cleared.
"It is more than good of you, sir. I'll try to deserve it," he said,
frankly.
"There is only one condition," Mr. Wade went on, "and your word is
sufficient for that. You are not to sell the mine without my consent.
The very fact that John Carrington is so anxious to get hold of it is
one of the best points in its favor."
"Carrington?" said Hastings, mechanically, wondering if the name so
constantly in his thoughts had begun to repeat itself audibly.
"He is a--a boor--who owns the adjoining mine," Mr. Wade classified
him. "He offered to buy the Tray-Spot. Of course I declined. And he
had the insolence to charge Richards with flooding his mine with water
from ours, instead of pumping it to the surface. Threatened us with a
lawsuit if we didn't put in additional pumps. He said his men were not
educated to the luxury of free baths as yet, and that swimming was an
unpopular sport on the eleventh level."
"But if it was true?" said Hastings.
"Of course it wasn't," said Mr. Wade, testily. "I wrote Richards,
and he said Carrington was just trying to get hold of the mine, and
wouldn't stop at anything to do it, because his, the Star, is down so
deep it is about worked out. Do you know," Mr. Wade went on, "this John
Carrington had the audacity to say that, since I'd never been West, he
didn't suppose I'd care to begin such trips _at my age_, and that, as I
had no son, he should think a reasonable proposition to sell ought to
interest me."
Mr. Wade intended to suggest only John Carrington's breach of good
manners, but in spite of himself his voice showed where the taunt
stung. And Hastings had a sudden comprehension of his uncle's sudden
benevolence, which in its very humanness quickened him from his heavy
sense of indebtedness for benefits received, into that warmer loyalty
of the ties of blood, into that sense of inter-dependence which this
was the first emergency to rouse.
He began to feel ashamed of the sense of injury he had had in the
abrupt summons to quit Paris, to put away his chosen profession for
a time. He began to feel ashamed of the lagging gratitude with which
he had received a gift which would make him a rich man; of that
involuntary wish that his uncle's generosity had taken another form.
A realization of the loneliness of age bound him to the older man with
bonds of sentiment stronger far, with warmhearted, generous youth, than
all those the government has seen fit to issue.
But Carrington? Though there might be dozens of Carringtons who owned
mines in the West.
"We'll take Holliday's car--he's offered it to me time and again--and
go out there. We can live on the car the few days I am here, and you're
young and can manage to make yourself comfortable afterward. I shall be
proud to introduce you as my nephew, Laurence." Mr. Wade was tasting
victory in prospect, and the taste was palatable. "Carrington has only
one son, and he's daubing canvas in Paris."
Then this was Elenore's father. Hastings foresaw complications to come.
"Ned Carrington and his sister were two of my best friends in Paris,
sir," he said, firmly. "I knew their father was a mine owner somewhere
in the West."
"Has this young Carrington any business ability?" demanded Mr. Wade.
His tone was quick and keen. He was getting at an important factor.
Hastings smiled in spite of himself.
"Not a scrap," he said, amusedly, "but he's a genius. He'll be a new
'old master' one of these days."
Mr. Wade's countenance relaxed amiably.
"These erratic young fellows are always _going_ to do wonders," he
said, indulgently. "For all the help he'll be to his father, he might
as well be a girl. One of these days you will be buying out John
Carrington on your own terms."
Nor did he dream that in the silence that followed, as he sat
comfortably certain of the discomfiture of the man who had flung at him
the two-edged taunt of age and childlessness, his nephew was saying to
himself that surely Elenore's father must be a reasonable man, that
there must be some rational basis on which he and John Carrington could
meet as friends. More, he saw himself with an assured income. _Then_
could he not, by virtue of that future friendship, gain a remarkably
valuable ally in that siege of the marvelous citadel--invulnerable,
indeed, save to a certain small sportsman who bends his bow to no man's
dictation, and yet for love of valor, or from mere caprice, ranges
himself at the unlikeliest moment with the besieging force, and wins
with a single well-sped shaft?
Whatever emotions the arrival of Mr. Wade and his nephew at Yellow Dog
excited in Richards, his outward attitude was one of bluff heartiness.
"You can't stay on your car, though, Mr. Wade," he said, decisively,
looking over its comfortable appointments with an appraising eye. "The
miners at the Star are too lawless. You'll have to put up with the
hotel." ("About twenty-four hours of the Raegan House will start them
for New York," he thought, with grim humor.)
"Do you mean to tell me that they would dare attack a private car?" Mr.
Wade demanded, aghast.
Richards shrugged his shoulders.
"There isn't much they wouldn't dare," he said, coolly, wondering how
thick it would be safe to pile it on, "but they're more interested in
people than property. The car's safe enough as long as you aren't in
it, but if a stick of dynamite happened to drop under it some night
when you were----"
"What has made such bad feeling between the mines?" Hastings asked,
quietly.
Richards' eyes narrowed slightly.
"Miners take the tone of their manager," he said, significantly.
Simple as question and answer were, antipathy quickened in that instant
between the two men.
Richards resented a certain something in Hastings' tone, and Hastings
made up his mind that Richards was overplaying.
Mr. Wade was regretting with exceeding heartiness that he had come at
all. Being blown to bits in this desolate-looking hole was furthest
from his desire.
Trusting himself to the horrors of a wilderness hotel seemed about as
hazardous an alternative. As for leaving his nephew in such a place,
was it not virtually condemning him to a more or less lingering death?
And Mr. Wade had grown amazingly fond of him during the last few
months, in the companionship which had resulted from their many-times
delayed expedition westward.
He was half inclined to make a formal tour of inspection, announcing
Hastings as the future owner, and then take him back and let him open
his architect's office at once. But Mr. Wade hated retreat.
"Then I am sure that you have men equally vigilant in repelling any
attacks upon property or persons," Hastings said, smoothly. "However,
it doesn't matter to me. I should have to come to the hotel, anyway,
later, when you have gone back, sir."
"Going to stay with us a while?" Richards asked him.
"Permanently," said Hastings, pleasantly.
Richards swung a questioning face toward Mr. Wade.
"The mine would have been my nephew's at my death, naturally,
Richards," Mr. Wade explained, with some dignity. "He is coming into
his own a little sooner, that is all. And if he chooses to remain----"
"As he does," Hastings laughed, genially, "and to learn all about his
mine from its competent manager."
Mr. Richards' face did not express any extreme joy.
"If you'll take my advice, you'll go home with your uncle and leave
your mine in my hands, Mr. Hastings," he said, bluffly. "It's a rough
country, and hard, dangerous work--work that you don't know anything
about, and that it will take you years to learn. And--I beg your
pardon, but I'll speak plainly--while you are learning you'll want to
give orders, and you'll make bad mistakes--expensive mistakes. They're
easy to make and hard to right. Not that it will be your fault. I
should if I tried to run Mr. Wade's bank. If you want your mine to keep
on being a good paying proposition, leave it in the hands of men who
made it one. Isn't that business, Mr. Wade? I've satisfied you, haven't
I?" His manner had a certain brusque appeal.
"Perfectly," said Mr. Wade, suavely.
Then he looked at Hastings. He was standing by the table heaped with
books and magazines, and there was something in the alertness of his
virile figure, well poised enough for a soldier; something in the lines
of his well-cut features, something in the steadiness and frankness of
the cool gray eyes, that suggested not only the strength of youth, but
the strength of the spirit. It came to Mr. Wade suddenly that he was
going to miss him, that the young fellow ought to have a chance to live
with his own class.
"And my nephew may suit himself," Mr. Wade went on, steadily. "The
mine is his without condition"--he spoke the words slowly--"and if he
chooses to leave it in your hands, and return East with me, he is quite
at liberty to do so."
Hastings smiled at him cheerfully.
"I shall stay, of course," he said, decidedly. "But I'll try not to
make my mining education too expensive."
"I've got a carriage outside," said Mr. Richards, rising abruptly.
"I s'pose you'd like to drive around town and out to the mine, to
look around a little. Then if you'll take dinner with me at the Raegan
House, you'll have quite an idea what it's like out here."
Mr. Livingstone Wade surveyed the landau into which he stepped with
scant favor; and the look which he gave to the ragged darky who held
the reins was only equaled by the one he bestowed on the two battered
equines who were to serve as their means of locomotion.
As they swung into the main street of the little town, Hastings laughed
with a perfectly genuine amusement.
"I might open an architect's office here, on the side," he said. "They
certainly need it."
Mr. Wade's eyes were upon an up-to-date trap, drawn by a well-matched,
high-stepping pair. The middle-aged man who was driving turned on them
a look of amused curiosity as they passed.
"Whom do those horses belong to?" demanded Mr. Wade, sharply.
"Belong to Carrington," said Richards, shortly. "That was his man.
That's his house at the other end of the street--that big one on the
hill." He jerked his head to indicate that it was back of them, and
they turned to see it. It had a large, comfortable, hospitable look,
more suggestive of the South than of the North.
"The hotel's good enough for me," said Richards, dryly.
Mr. Wade wondered why this sentiment, which had seemed so admirable to
him in New York, lost its flavor here on the ground.
As they passed a blacksmith's shop, the smith was shoeing a Kentucky
thoroughbred, who looked at them with an airy unconcern.
"Carrington's," said Richards to Mr. Wade's uplifted eyebrows.
The expression on Mr. Wade's face was a curious one. Your tourist in
Europe now and then wears its twin, on discovering that the United
States is renting a second-rate building for an embassy, when other
governments own pretentious ones.
"Tell you what," said Hastings, suddenly. "I think I shall buy a neat
little touring car to run around here. Pretty bad grades, but there are
half a dozen makes that could take them easily."
Mr. Wade looked at him with the ever-growing conviction that he was the
kind of nephew to have. In spite of his conservatism, he had adopted
the auto as he had the telephone.
"Quite right, Laurence," he said, complacently. "When you order the one
you prefer, have the bill sent to me."
"Going to import a show-fure?" queried Richards, with ironic pleasantry.
Hastings shook his head.
"Never saw one I couldn't run yet," he said, cheerfully, "and when I do
I'll send it back to the factory as defective."
"If he'll just put in his time running it, it's all I'll ask of him,"
communed Richards with himself.
At two o'clock of that day Mr. Wade had concluded that all he had ever
heard of the enormities of the West was far below the actual fact.
His first grievance had been the dilapidated conveyance; his second the
fact that Richards, who for reasons of his own had not tried to make
the expedition a bed of roses, had insisted on his getting out a dozen
times to see certain offices, the shaft house, and a number of other
buildings, about whose use he was extremely hazy. And these pilgrimages
had necessitated his walking through fine red dust, which not only
reduced his immaculate footgear to its lowest terms, but bordered
the bottom of his pale gray trouser legs with a deep red band, which
Richards assured him was indelible.
But the crowning enormity came with the dinner at Raegan's Hotel, which
invitation Mr. Wade had felt he could hardly refuse in courtesy.
At the moment they entered the dining room Richards was called to the
phone.
"Take these gentlemen down to my table, Maggie," he said to the head
waitress as he turned away.
Mr. Wade regarded this young woman disapprovingly. The curve of her
pompadour and the curves of her figure were too aggressively spherical.
That her overgenerous bulk could be compressed to the dimensions of
her waist seemed to indicate that whalebone had been unduly overlooked
in modern mechanics. It hinted, too, though not to Mr. Wade, of
a forcefulness of spirit which, seeing in a handkerchief-sized,
knife-pleated white apron a legitimate adornment, adjusted the
physical, Spartan-like, to its requirements. But Mr. Wade's mere
passive and impersonal dislike quickened to an active rage in that
awful moment when she tucked her arm comfortably in his, and promenaded
him the length of the dining room to an untidy looking table already
occupied by a portly Hibernian, who was engaged in extensive molar
exploration with a diminutive wooden pick.
"Friends of Mr. Richards, Mr. O'Shaughnessy," she said, glibly, and Mr.
Wade felt himself released from her muscular arm only to feel the front
of a chair pressed with energetic purpose against the back of his knees.
As certain muscles automatically relaxed to enable him to be seated,
his stunned sense of propriety recovered consciousness enough to enable
him to decide that of all outrages ever perpetrated on a gentleman,
this last was the worst.
"Mr. Richards' friends are my friends," responded Mr. O'Shaughnessy,
cordially.
Mr. Wade looked at Hastings, who was seating himself with outer
sobriety and inward hilarity. He comforted himself by taking that
sobriety for disgust.
"I suppose you are not out here for your health?" Mr. O'Shaughnessy
opined, genially.
"No," said Mr. Wade, icily.
"What line ar-re you in?" Mr. O'Shaughnessy pursued.
"I fail to understand you," said Mr. Wade, stiffly.
"What house are you thravelin' for? What are you selling?" Mr.
O'Shaughnessy explained.
That he, Mr. Livingstone Wade, should be taken for a traveling salesman!
"I am a banker," said Mr. Wade. He felt it due to himself to say as
much as that.
"Faro and that face of yours ar-re twins the world over," said Mr.
O'Shaughnessy, genially, closing one eye and looking intelligently at
Hastings through the other. Then he cast the toothpick on the floor.
"Have a cigar?" he said, hospitably, throwing a couple carelessly on
the table as he rose to depart. "Drop in and see me if you get thirsty
while you're here. The palm garden. Two doors up. The house is good for
a few yet."
He stopped to joke with the head waitress a moment on his way out.
Richards, returning, decided that Mr. Wade was pretty well fagged. He
had become monosyllabic.
The catsup bottle in the middle of the table, the greasy, lukewarm soup
in stone-china bowls, the tasteless profusion of canned vegetables, the
dubious-looking water, and the muddy mixture, bitter from long boiling,
which the Raegan House called coffee, were only additional affronts to
a man already at the limit of his endurance.
His announcement of his intention to spend the rest of the day in the
car, and to make it his headquarters during his stay, was delivered
with a decision which left no possibility for protest.
What was mere dynamite to such indignities as these!
He stepped into the landau, which Richards had ordered round again,
with a sensation of relief, heightened by that gentleman's statement
that he shouldn't be able to see them again until morning. Richards
found Mr. Wade rather exhausting, on his side.
"If you see a fellow in freak clothes on your way back, you can know
it's that son of Carrington's," he observed, as he stood on the
sidewalk.
Hastings had his foot on the step of the landau, but he wheeled.
"Is Ned Carrington here?" he demanded.
"Been here all summer. Father broke his leg in a runaway and sent for
him," Richards growled.
"Then I think I'll walk over and see him," Hastings said promptly, "if
you'll excuse me, sir."
He smiled confidently at his uncle.
"You shan't go near him," said Richards, fiercely, "with that shark of
a father of his trying to swindle us every way he can."
"Whatever his father is, Ned Carrington is a gentleman and my friend,"
said Hastings, quietly.
"Tell him he can't go," Richards demanded of Mr. Wade. And his
insistence was fatal. Mr. Wade would not have influenced his nephew at
Richards' dictation just now if Hastings had announced his intention of
going to perdition.
Moreover, he trusted Hastings. And--this is an awful anti-climax--he
wanted a nap.
"I hope you will find your friend home, Laurence," he said, suavely.
"Business quarrels can safely be ignored between gentlemen."
Richards, watching the erect old figure disappearing in the landau
toward the station, and the athletic young one striding off in the
direction of the Star mine, hated them with an equal intensity.
John Carrington, dozing away on the great wicker divan on his broad
veranda, in the warmth of a September afternoon, opened his eyes at the
click of the gate.
The young man coming rapidly up the graveled walk was a stranger.
"Mr. Carrington?" he said, pleasantly.
"Yes, sir," Carrington replied.
"Your son and I were friends in Paris, Mr. Carrington," he went on. "My
name is Hastings. I hope he is at home."
Hastings! Paris! This was the young fellow whom Sarah had written
about--who was so attentive to Elenore.
Carrington looked at him critically, and was pleased.
"Sit down, Mr. Hastings," he said, cordially. "Ned just went in to
order the horses for a little later. He will be out presently, and
will be glad to see you."
"I was surprised to hear that Ned was here, Mr. Carrington," Hastings
went on, seating himself. "He was to start for the East with Velantour
the day I left Paris, and I supposed he was painting away for dear life
somewhere in the Vale of Cashmere."
"I didn't even know he intended to go," said Carrington, quietly.
"What!" said Hastings. "He hasn't told you that Velantour asked him
to go? It was the greatest opportunity he could ever have!" Then he
thought. "Of course your illness was first with him," he said. "I hope
I haven't been telling tales out of school." He smiled frankly. Then
"He's a genius, though." The praise burst out spontaneously. "They
expect great things of him in Paris, Mr. Carrington."
John Carrington did some rapid thinking. So the boy had put aside the
biggest opportunity in his life to come back to him. Put it aside
cheerfully. To gratify--John Carrington was hard on himself now--his
father's selfish pride. The need had not been imperative. He could have
written him all the questions it was advisable to ask him. But he had
been in pain, and harassed, and he had sacrificed the boy to it. Well,
he should go back soon. He, John Carrington, was not so near senility
that he couldn't manage his own affairs. His jaw set squarely.
"I'm glad you told me, Mr. Hastings," he said, calmly. Quick steps were
coming through the hall. "Before he had a chance to head you off," he
concluded, smilingly. The eyes he turned toward the door were very
proud. "Here's a friend you'll be glad to see," he said, cheerily. Yet
it seemed to him, and to Hastings, that the lad's first impulse was
toward recoil.
He certainly paled a little. And Hastings said to himself that Ned had,
in some subtle way, changed indefinably, but certainly. His eyes did
not carry out the comfortable familiarity of his attire. It appeared to
Hastings that they were making some demand upon him--a demand that he
could not understand.
But the next second young Carrington came forward with at least a
surface cordiality.
"How did you find me out--Hastings?" he said, with a slight hesitation
before the name, as perplexing as the characteristic grasp of his
hand, familiar and unfamiliar at once, and the tinge of formality that
obtruded itself unmistakably.
"I had no idea you were here until I heard it just now from Richards,"
said Hastings, struggling with a vague sense of rebuff.
The name might have been the Medusa head.
Then "Richards?" John Carrington queried. Hastings flushed.
"My uncle, Mr. Wade, has given me the Tray-Spot mine," he said, and his
voice became formal in turn. "We lunched with our manager to-day."
In spite of his annoyance, his lips twitched at the memory of it.
"It seems that there is war between the two mines, Mr. Carrington;" he
turned to the older man. "I don't know anything of mining, but there
must be some way out of it which would be just both to your interests
and to ours."
For John Carrington had impressed him indelibly as an honest man.
Hastings' tone was both dignified and frank. John Carrington liked it.
But could good come out of anything connected with the Tray-Spot? It
had always been a thorn in the flesh.
Ned had crossed the veranda quickly, to seat himself behind a
book-laden table. Once so ensconced, he drew a long breath of relief.
Then he began to look amused.
"We have suggested a way, but it did not meet with your uncle's
approval," said John Carrington, quietly.
"I quite agree with my uncle that we do not care to sell," said
Hastings, calmly.
"Nor, I assume, do you care to discharge your manager," John Carrington
went on.
"No," said Hastings, frankly again; "my uncle has always considered
Richards an invaluable man."
"He certainly has been," Carrington commented, ironically. "Then, I
think we can cut out mining as a topic of conversation, Mr. Hastings.
You and Ned can gossip about Paris."
"That's where I differ with you, dad," Ned broke in, spiritedly.
Hastings, stung, started to rise, but "Don't be silly," the lad said,
impatiently, but with more friendliness than he had yet shown. "We may
have a thousand pleasant things to say about Paris, but this is the
important thing, and we had better keep at it.
"Laurence"--Hastings gave a little start; Ned had never called him
Laurence--"is quite as much of a greenhorn about mines as I was a few
months ago. It's only fair to tell him just what our position is. He
will at least hear a story of our grievances that hasn't been garbled."
His tone was spirited.
"I should like that," said Hastings, quietly.
Ned leaned forward eagerly. Then he settled his cravat with a peculiar
twist, which Hastings recognized as Ned's characteristic preliminary to
discourse. He and Elenore had laughed over it many times together.
"Ours is the older and deeper mine," Ned began. "That's the first
thing. And all the mines here strike the big bodies of water in
sinking. That's the second. Your manager has hit on the economical plan
of doing without large pumps; and when you strike water, he lets it
seep through to us, and we raise it for you. It increases our dangers
and expenses and your dividends. How would you like it in our place?"
John Carrington watched him with a look of mingled pride and amusement.
"In the case you have stated, I shouldn't like it at all," Hastings
stated, coolly. "But Richards has assured my uncle that this grievance
of yours is imaginary; that the water you get comes from your own
sinking. Isn't there a possibility that may be so?"
"No," said Ned, positively; "there isn't."
Hastings hesitated. That Ned believed what he was saying was obvious;
but, after all, what did he know about it? Wasn't he, save in his art,
the most impractical soul living? Why shouldn't it be quite as likely
that Carrington's men deceived him as that Richards deceived his uncle?
"There ought to be the simplest of ways of settling that," he said,
slowly. "Let a couple of your men go down our mine and satisfy
themselves that we're doing what's right."
John Carrington's laugh was ironically amused.
"You might suggest that to Richards," he said. Then his tone changed.
"He won't even give us a map of your workings," he said, sharply. "As
for letting anyone from the Star underground, he has announced pretty
clearly that the man who tried it wouldn't come up again. And though
Richards' word hasn't any par value, I am willing to believe that for
once he meant what he said."
"Aren't you painting Richards in rather too black a color?" Hastings
protested. "Aren't you unduly prejudiced against him? Premeditated
murder, now?"
"Accident, my dear sir," John Carrington said, ironically, "and
underground accidents are almost too easy."
Hastings hesitated. He looked at Ned.
The lad made a Gallic gesture that sent his hands far apart. "What
would you?" it signified.
There was a tinge of mockery in his friendly smile. Yet something of
confidence, too.
"My dear Hastings," he said; "it is decidedly up to you. Our word or
Richards'."
Hastings flushed.
"My dear Ned," he said, steadily, "that I should doubt your good faith
is impossible. Nor," he flared, "do I think you doubt mine. I have
been thrust suddenly, through the great generosity of an uncle to whom
I am as loyal as you are to your father, into a situation that I know
nothing about. I have a manager in whom my uncle, a cautious man, has
believed implicitly. You tell me this man is a rogue. But you may be
wrong. I can't condemn him unheard. One thing is certain," he went on.
"I shall find out. And if there has been anything crooked about our
management, it shall be righted." The line of his lips straightened.
The muscles of his jaw grew tense. It was impossible to doubt that he
meant what he said.
Both listeners believed him. Both admired him. But John Carrington
looked his admiration frankly, and young Carrington dropped his eyelids
satisfiedly over his.
"That is all we could ask," said John Carrington, approvingly. "Now let
me hear you youngsters chat about Paris."
But Hastings was impatient to be off now.
"I must get back to my uncle," he said, lightly. "It has been a hard
day for him, and I suggested that I would serve as secretary for once."
"Then, order the horses round for Mr. Hastings, Ned," said John
Carrington, and as the lad disappeared, and Hastings protested: "They
are standing harnessed in the stable," he said, decisively. "You
mustn't insist on our being too inhospitable."
And as Hastings capitulated, John Carrington followed out a sudden
impulse.
"You will explain to your uncle that this half-mended leg of mine will
prevent my calling on him," he stated, feeling suddenly that Hastings'
uncle must have some good points, "but I shall be glad to put my horses
at his disposal while he is here. Ned will come over to your car in the
morning, and say so gracefully."
He smiled confidently at the returning lad.
There was a queer, contented look lurking in the lad's eyes. "As
gracefully as he can," he laughed, lightly. "I'll walk down to the gate
with you," he added.
It was on the way to the gate that Hastings asked the question which
was really the mainspring of his call.
"Where is your sister now? Did she go to Brittany?"
Young Carrington seemed amused.
"Elenore's plans were rather upset this summer," he said, lightly, "as
well as mine. She's far from Brittany, in a curious little place you
never heard of in France." He was rather proud of the way that sentence
was turned. "She's with a friend, and enjoying herself, though she says
it's all queer."
Hastings had a mental vision of Elenore in some far-off corner of
France, making gay over all its out-of-the-way absurdities in that
companionable way of hers.
"I wish she were here," he said, suddenly.
"Oh, well, I dare say she'd rather be where she is than anywhere else,"
Ned rejoined, carelessly.
Which was cold comfort to Hastings.
"By the way," he said, turning, as he was about to step into the trap,
"I suppose we're perfectly safe to make our headquarters in the car
here?"
"Safe as the Waldorf, if you're on a siding," Ned laughed. "If you stay
on the main track the cars will hit you."
Hastings mentally swore at himself. The question had sounded idiotic.
"See you in the morning," Ned called, as Hastings drove off. But he
walked back to the house rather slowly.
"Pretty tired, dad?" he asked, cheerfully.
"Ned," said John Carrington, slowly, "when you children were little I'm
afraid I loved Elenore best. But no daughter can be to a man what his
son is."
There was a little silence. John Carrington lay with his eyes closed.
He was tired.
"Do you think Elenore was interested in that young fellow?" he asked,
finally.
"If she was, she never said so," young Carrington replied. He was
looking off in the direction of the Tray-Spot.
"If I were a girl, I'm inclined to think he could have me," John
Carrington announced.
Young Carrington's laugh was lightly amused.
"If I were a girl, I'd lead him on a bit, myself," he announced.
When Hastings had returned to the car the afternoon before, he told his
uncle the story of his interview with the Carringtons quite simply. He
was too wise to urge action upon a tired, out-of-temper man; nor did
he wait for Mr. Wade's comment. He shifted conversation to pleasanter
things, and by the time Joseph had served them a nice little dinner
Mr. Wade's outer man bore the visible signs of gastronomic peace. A
few games of cribbage, which he won, yet not too easily, were also a
soothing influence. When Hastings said good-night, Mr. Wade opened the
subject of his own accord.
"How did this claim of Carrington's strike you, Laurence?"
"It struck me that we must satisfy ourselves about it as a matter of
personal honor," said Hastings, firmly. "Of course you will know better
than I how and when to take the initiative."
There was nothing that urged or insisted in his tone. It was quietly
assured.
"Good-night, sir," he smiled, and disappeared. Disappeared to dream
that the car was a balloon, and that he was sailing swiftly through
sunny skies to Elenore.
Mr. Livingstone Wade, over-fatigued, was jolted through dreamland by
that unbridled nocturnal equine who bolts from one disaster to another.
The horror-stricken Mr. Wade found himself lunching at Sherry's with
the head waitress from Raegan's. She had tied that knife-pleated apron
around her neck, like a bib; and she told him things were "elegunt,"
and he could call her Maggie.
She insisted on his drinking catsup instead of claret, and ordered the
salad compounded with soft hematite instead of paprika.
All the directors of the bank were seated at a table near them; and
they looked quite as appalled as Mr. Wade felt _he_ would, had he seen
any one of them in his place.
How he came to be in this awful predicament, he had no idea. He only
knew that he was riveted to his chair, and that his face, in spite of
his inward horror, _would_ wear a pleased smile. And speech, though he
strove desperately to articulate, was an impossibility.
Then Hastings appeared, and said seriously: "This, sir, is a matter
that affects your personal honor."
It was in a grim determination to escape from this purgatory at all
hazards that Mr. Wade finally jumped himself awake; and though every
muscle in his body ached throbbingly, he gave a sigh of contentment as
he stirred his face on his pillow.
Trevanion, coming up to the house on a summons from John Carrington,
found young Carrington coming down the steps, looking a bit more of a
swashbuckling dandy than ever.
"Morning, Trevanion," he greeted him, buoyantly.
Then he nodded toward the waiting trap.
"I'm going to pay a morning call on the owners of the Tray-Spot," he
announced, genially.
"Confound 'em!" muttered Trevanion.
The lad looked him straight in the eyes, in the way Trevanion found so
remarkable.
"Oh, I think they're square," he said, lightly, "and that Richards' day
is about done. It will decide itself in a few days now, anyway."
Trevanion watched him with a curious expression as he drove off.
Mr. Wade had wakened not only refreshed but in a mood which a certain
irreverent clerk had once characterized as his "dusting off the earth
day" and a good time to lie low. Hastings greeted the morning sun
joyfully, because it shone on the little town where Elenore had spent
her childhood.
Richards came in just as they were enjoying their after-breakfast
cigars.
"Well," he said, dropping into a chair without preliminary greetings,
or waiting for Mr. Wade to request him to do so, "what's the program
for to-day?"
Then his eyes fell on Mr. Wade's trouser legs.
"Told you it wouldn't come off, didn't I?" he laughed, boisterously.
Mr. Wade resented Richards' unceremonious entrance, and resented still
more this direct allusion to his sartorial disfigurement, which had
resisted the most zealous efforts of Joseph. He considered that, under
present circumstances, the legs should be considered as analogous to
those of the Queen of Spain.
And that phrase of Hastings, "a matter of personal honor," had hit the
bull's-eye.
Mr. Wade prided himself first that the family fortune had been made
honestly, by the rise in Manhattan real estate; and last, that the Wade
name stood in the business world to-day as a symbol of integrity that
erred, if it erred at all, on the side of over-scrupulousness.
"Mr. Richards," he said, a trifle stiffly, "when I inquired into the
matter, you wrote me that Mr. Carrington's grievance had no foundation
in fact, did you not?"
The bluffness faded out of Richards' face and left ugliness disclosed.
"He brought that old yarn back with him from Carrington's yesterday, I
suppose," he sneered, jerking his head toward Hastings.
Hastings had that rare faculty of knowing when to let the game play
itself.
"Very naturally, Mr. Richards," said Mr. Wade, with dangerous
smoothness; "but that is not the question."
Richards' face darkened.
"I'll tell you what the question is, Mr. Wade, and you can settle it
right now," he snarled. "It's whether you are going to take the word of
the man who has made the mine, or the word of the man who's trying to
blackmail it, so's he can buy it cheap."
It was a good issue, so good that Richards himself was proud of it. He
leaned back in his chair with something of a swagger.
"That you are still in charge of the Tray-Spot is the best proof of
my confidence in you," Mr. Wade said, in a more gracious tone, "but
I propose to place the Carringtons in a position where they will have
to admit that they are in the wrong, as you say they are. We will tell
them that they may send a representative through our mine at any time,
and that he will be accorded every courtesy."
"Not on your life, we won't!" said Richards, fiercely.
"That," said Mr. Wade, serenely, "is a matter where we differ."
"Do you suppose," Richards went on, working himself into a rage, "that
anyone they sent down would come up and tell the truth? He'd say just
what he was paid to say, and he'd find just what he was paid to find."
Joseph entered with two cards, and thereby effected a diversion.
One of the cards bore the name of Mr. John Carrington and the other
that of Mr. Edward Carrington.
The gods fought on the Carrington side.
"Show him in," said Mr. Wade, suavely.
Young Carrington, debonair as a certain Monsieur Beaucaire, made his
entrance with an easy grace. The delicate deference of his manner
toward Mr. Wade, the pleasant _camaraderie_ which he showed to
Hastings, the impersonal politeness with which he recognized Richards'
existence, were all points in his favor.
So, too, were his punctiliousness in making his father's excuses,
and the quiet courtesy with which he placed his horses at Mr. Wade's
disposal.
His manner was so free from embarrassment or assertiveness, so
evidently inspired by a nice sense of proprieties, that he might have
been the ambassador of one king to another.
Richards, retiring to one of the car windows, his back toward them all,
his fingers beating a nerve-racking tattoo upon the glass, was his
direct antithesis.
"My nephew tells me you have distinct ability as an artist," Mr. Wade
said, when, the preliminary interchange of courtesies over, the three
were comfortably seated. Mr. Wade thought it was likely, too.
"Then, I may tell you that we expect him to be one of our best
architects," young Carrington returned, gracefully.
"The rising architect of Yellow Dog," Hastings said, with a wave of his
hands. "I think I shall begin by building a little bungalow here for
myself."
"A very good idea," said Mr. Wade, decisively.
Hastings' first phrase had smitten him with a sudden contrition. He
felt, too, that if he was going to come out to Yellow Dog himself, and
if his nephew stayed there he should, of course, come out once a year,
at least, a cozily built bungalow, where he might be made comfortable,
was in the line of a necessity. "I should get about it at once," he
declared.
"Perhaps you would like to drive about this morning, and select your
site for 'A Bungalow for One,'" said young Carrington, laughingly.
There was a slightly mocking emphasis on the last word.
"I shouldn't have it too small," said Mr. Wade, firmly.
Richards was whistling between his teeth now, a performance which
always enraged Mr. Wade.
"But we will have to let the site go for this morning, at least;" and
there was a precise distinctness about Mr. Wade's words now. "Mr.
Richards has just been arranging to take us down the mine this morning."
Richards wheeled round, surprised.
Young Carrington rose with an unhurried ease.
"Then, I must not detain you," he said, calmly.
"And why would it not be a good idea for you to send one of your men,
in whom you have full confidence, down with us?"--Mr. Wade's tone was
entirely urbane. "He would, perhaps, be able not only to assure himself
of actual conditions, but to explain your contention to us in the
workings under discussion."
Richards held himself tense.
"I should like to send our shift boss, with your permission," said
young Carrington, quietly, though inwardly he exulted. "I will have
him meet you at your shaft house whenever you say."
"Mr. Wade," said Richards, and the effort he made to control himself
made the veins in his face distend purplingly, "when Mr. John
Carrington is well enough to go down our mine, I shall be glad"--how
the word choked him--"to take him down myself; but Trevanion, their
shift boss, is at the bottom of the trouble. He's tricky and dishonest.
I'd rather resign than take him down the mine."
For in the time that would elapse before John Carrington was able to
take such a jaunt much could be done.
There was a moment's pause, in which Richards' claim and Carrington's
were equi-balanced. The very fact of Hastings' personal bias held him
inactive.
Then young Carrington spoke.
"I will answer for Trevanion's honesty with my own," he said. There was
an emotional note in the voice he tried to hold steady.
"Off the same piece, _I_ guess," sneered Richards, nastily.
The scales swayed down on the Carrington side.
Mr. Wade's code did not permit his guests to be insulted by his
subordinates.
"My dear Mr. Carrington, you leave us no option when you take that
stand," he said, suavely. "Whenever your man is ready, then."
"I think he is still at the house with my father," said young
Carrington, unsteadily. "I can telephone from the station here."
Mr. Wade looked out of the window. Beside Carrington's trap stood the
landau of yesterday. "If you will drive home and bring your man over,
we will go directly to the mine with Mr. Richards," he said.
Young Carrington, bursting in upon his father and Trevanion, told it
all in a breath.
Trevanion rose with the last word.
"The sooner I'm there the better," he said, phlegmatically.
"It's queer business," said John Carrington, frowning. "Keep your eyes
open. What do you think of it?"
"I'll tell you when I come up," said Trevanion. "If I don't come up,
you'll look after my boy?"
John Carrington nodded.
"Keep close to young Hastings," he said, tersely. "Don't let Richards
get behind you alone. I'm inclined to think, though, that the whole
thing will be a farce. He'll take you into a few levels where there
couldn't be any question, and that will be all. Wade and his nephew
won't know. And that will be all there is to it."
"I'll drive you over," said Ned. His eyes were bright with excitement.
Trevanion grinned as he settled himself in the trap.
"I'm going to get my swell ride before I go down," he said. "Mostly
they take 'em when they come up--in a box."
The others were waiting, garbed in oilskins, candles in their
caps--precautionary measures which inclined Mr. Wade to feel that
there was something wrong in the management of a mine that was neither
lighted nor heated.
Hastings was struggling not to chafe under his role of masterly
inactivity; he comforted himself with the thought that it was causing
things to move in the right direction, at any rate.
Richards' expression was sardonic. As Carrington had surmised, he
proposed to tire out the greenhorns by an exhaustive progress through
workings which would be of no possible interest to Trevanion.
He calculated shrewdly about how long it would take before they would
be glad to come up. If Trevanion remained behind them, or if he went
down without them later--Richards shrugged his shoulders. It was easy
for a man to fall down an uncovered winze in a strange mine. And the
fall would explain any bruises.
As they started for the cage, he turned to young Carrington. His smile
was distinctly disagreeable.
"Sorry you don't feel like coming, too," he said, "but you might catch
cold or get your clothes dirty."
Whatever faults there were to young Carrington's credit, cowardice was
not one of them. Not that foolhardiness is not almost as reprehensible.
"If you'll lend me a cap and a pair of boots, I shall be delighted," he
answered instantly.
"No, Mr. Ned. You're not in this," Trevanion remonstrated.
Young Carrington was pulling on his cap composedly now.
"You've never been down the Star, even. You won't be of any use,"
Trevanion insisted. Young Carrington was getting into an oilskin coat.
Richards had not thought he would.
"I'll telephone your father," Trevanion declared.
"Then I'll go down without you while you're doing it," young Carrington
declared, willfully.
Trevanion followed him into the cage without more ado. But he didn't
like it.
As the cage dropped into the blackness of the shaft, Richards thought
with malicious pleasure that he would outwit them all. Trevanion,
holding it everyday work for himself, was uneasy over the boy; Hastings
was impatient at his own ignorance--he hated to feel so out of his
sphere; Mr. Wade, reviewing each successive stage of the proceedings
which had placed him in his present situation, called himself what he
would have slain any fellow man for thinking, a silly old fool; and
Carrington--ah, a curious tangle of thoughts was young Carrington's
brain, with a curious after-vision of a bright blue sky.
Up in the big house on the hill, John Carrington was wondering if it
was not time for Ned to come home.
It is a curious experience--this going underground for the first time.
The chill and the dampness, the change in the air pressure, and the
darkness--that vague, depressing darkness, on which the candle in your
cap makes so vague and flickering an impression that it seems nervous
and palpitant at its own temerity in attempting so gigantic a task.
Above all, and above you, as you clearly realize, for an eighth of a
mile, perhaps, the huge impending weight of earth and rock, against
whose menace timbering a foot and a half thick seems like trying to
bolster the basement of a tottering St. Paul's with matches.
It is like finding oneself in some gigantic letter press, the screw
of which the hand of fate may choose to turn--perhaps now; pressing
downward with pitiless, relentless, inanimate mechanism until the
Parchment of the World bears the dull red mark of these unwilling
witnesses to its deed.
These are all terrors unconfessed. Farthest of real menaces you
find--whose vague terror is made dormant by the real necessities of the
moment, the constant strain of the eye to distinguish--now to avoid the
direct peril of an uncovered winze underfoot, now to notice how closely
the "lagging" roofs in the drift, this indefinitely long hole, seven
and a half feet square, in which you find yourself.
Then comes the strain of the novice brain to comprehend the reasons and
the logic of it all.
Richards showed his native shrewdness in the way he managed the
expedition. The humor of its personnel was quite within his
comprehension. Three men, ignorant of every detail of mining, Trevanion
of the Star, and himself.
It was grotesque enough for comedy.
And, too, Richards had at last taken Mr. Wade's measure--or thought he
had.
"You have to sling softsoap to suit the pig-headed old sissy," he
phrased it.
And he assumed a bluff heartiness which actually became genuine at
times, as he explained carefully and clearly the A B C's of things.
For Richards loved the mine he had made, loved it after the fashion of
his nature, with an intensity of possession.
Fought for it fairly when fairness served best, and trickily when
trickiness seemed more profitable. Took a man's genuine pride when he
had forced it to obey him. Abused its future for the present good if he
felt like it. Slaved for it fiercely in reprisal. It was the only way
Richards knew how to love anything.
That these two men whom the accident of fortune had placed in actual
ownership of the mine should interfere with him had roused first
his rage, and now his determination to placate them, to hoodwink
them. He showed a good-natured tolerance of their ignorance, and an
indefatigable patience in explanation.
"That's it; now you're catching on fine," he encouraged them, as they
grasped some elemental principle of mining. He led them over a good
deal of ground during these explanations. He piloted them with a rough
carefulness which even included young Carrington. The boy's being there
at all amused him rather than otherwise. But Trevanion was guarding
young Carrington with as wary an eye as he was watching Richards.
Mr. Wade decided that for the first time Richards was appearing to
advantage.
Aboveground his crudities of manner might be repellent; here he was in
his native element, shrewd, practical and zealous.
Mr. Wade began to feel that Trevanion the Taciturn was quite as likely
to prove the villain of the piece.
To be sure, it appeared that they had embarked on a tremendous
undertaking. Mr. Wade felt that the mine was larger than he had
supposed, but, as Richards said, they might as well understand it
thoroughly. On this Mr. Wade, with legs that threatened to drop from
his hip sockets, plodded on.
Young Carrington turned white more than once, but shut his teeth
and went on defiantly; and Hastings owned to himself that he was
desperately tired. Trevanion was as unwearied as Cornish patience, but
Richards was not trying to tired out Trevanion--physically.
It lacked five minutes of the noon hour when they saw the cage ahead
of them, waiting at this, the seventh and lowest, working level of the
mine.
Below, as Richard told them, was the development level, to which the
cage did not descend.
"We can't go down now," he said, looking at his watch. "They're just
going to blast, and it will take an hour afterward for the smoke
to clear. We'll go up and have our dinner, and come down again this
afternoon to finish up, eh?"
Lunch, up on the earth's surface, with sunshine and first grade air.
The words were as welcome to Mr. Wade as though an archangel had spoken
them.
Young Carrington, too, shared his feeling; shared, too, though
unknowingly, Mr. Wade's calculation that his legs would just about
carry him to the cage.
Richards, with an inward grin, assured himself that those two, at
least, would attempt no afternoon expedition.
This farce of investigation would soon be ended. It would be quite safe
to urge them to come down again. They had had quite enough. He looked
forward with amused anticipation to making the suggestion after lunch.
Trevanion hesitated about declaring an intention to remain without the
others through the noon hour. No, he would see young Carrington safely
out of it first; then----
They were almost at the cage now.
Richards was showing them the bell at the side of the shaft, the signal
to the engineer to hoist the cage.
"All the men but one get in," he explained. "He touches the bell and
races across to get in the cage. The engineer allows him so many
seconds to make it. No, you can't stop it after it starts."
Mr. Wade, who had arrived at that stage when he recked not how the cage
went up, as long as it went, continued an unlistening way to that haven.
There was a detonation from the development level.
"Blast," said Richards, to young Carrington's look. "They're in rather
dangerous ground, and so we have them leave it until just before the
noon hour, in case----"
A man shot up from the ladder-way. Another. And another. The
ladder-hole spouted them out like a volcano.
They ran toward the cage panic-stricken, sweeping Mr. Wade into it
before them. With an instant comprehension of the disaster that placed
them all in a common peril, Richards turned swiftly to the others.
"Get in!" he shouted. "They've struck water!"
He caught Hastings by the arm, and rammed his way through the press
like a great machine.
"You ---- fools! There's plenty of time!" he railed at his men.
Trevanion, guarding young Carrington with his right arm, thrust his
mighty bulk through the struggling mass just behind Richards.
They were almost at the cage door when a terrorized Finn fought his way
past them, striking out blindly at everything in reach.
One elbow thrust sent young Carrington spinning from Trevanion's
protecting arm to the ground, and the next instant the Finn dropped his
full weight between Richards and Hastings, and leaped past them into
the cage.
He shouted triumphantly to his fellows. It was jargon to Mr. Wade. But
Richards knew, and raged, and the other miners knew, and rejoiced,
that he had given the signal to hoist. Trevanion was lifting young
Carrington in his arms.
Richards stepped into the cage, with an oath.
"Come!" he said, fiercely, to Hastings, jamming a few inches of space
free in the cage with his bulk. "Room for one. You haven't a second to
lose!" he shouted.
Hastings put his hands in his pockets, coolly.
"I stay with my guests," he said. And with his first word, the cage
started upward.
As he turned toward the others, Trevanion, one arm round young
Carrington, caught hold of his sleeve.
"We maun run for it!" he shouted.
For out of the great black hole beneath them rose the water, spreading
across the bottom of the shaft.
From above, and suddenly faint, they could hear Mr. Wade calling that
they must stop, that they must go back for his nephew, and his voice
was the voice of a very old man. Trevanion instinctively led them
running back into the drift. Young Carrington wrenched himself free.
"I'm all right," he said. "Took the breath out of me for a minute. I
won't hinder."
Back of them the water followed silently, gaining gradually up the
grade of the drift.
"Not time to make that first rise--the one we came down," Trevanion
said, as they sped along. "Ought to be another--here it is!"
He swerved into a black air shaft, but swept them back into the drift
the next instant.
"No ladder. Stripped!" he said, laconically, and on they hurried again.
The water was a thin encroaching line thirty feet back now. Now the
rise in the level hid it from sight.
And finally another rise. Stripped.
And on again.
Young Carrington was getting tired. Even peril was losing its spur. He
stumbled a little.
Trevanion caught him round the waist, lifting him along with a strong
gentleness; looking at him with curiously wondering eyes, but eyes that
never lost their look of fealty.
"Why are the ladders gone?" young Carrington asked, and he kept his
voice resolutely free from fear.
"Economy," said Trevanion, briefly. "Wanted to use them somewhere else.
We'll find one after a bit." Which might or might not be so.
"And if we don't?" said Hastings, swinging alongside.
"They'll send the cage to the level above, and your men will be
hallooing all over the place for us," Trevanion told him. He thought
with a certain grim humor that Richards would not make any wild
exertion to save him. Hastings' presence was their best hope, if the
ladders failed.
"If it should take them a long time to find us?" It was young
Carrington now.
"Water may stop altogether," Trevanion stated. "Depends on the size of
the vug. Anyway, it rises slower the more ground it covers. We'll have
time enough." But no one could tell that.
Disappointment. Hope. Then the end of the drift stared them in the
face--rock and dirt as a final blast had left it.
But "Here's our raise," said Trevanion, bluffly, turning off.
And the raise was ladderless: a vertical opening, whose hard rock walls
were too slippery for even a Cornishman to climb. Trapped!
They looked at the place where the ladder should have been, as though
it must, perforce, appear. Young Carrington ran a finger rapidly round
inside his collar, as though it had grown suddenly tight. The air
seemed close. Then he pulled himself together sharply. Say what you
will, blood will tell.
"And now what?" he asked Trevanion, cheerfully.
Hastings' eyes were looking the same question.
"Wait," said Trevanion, stoically.
To wait, inactive: it is the real test of courage.
With any kind of activity, hope plays an obligato; but when there is no
struggle to be made, fears tries a tremolo first on one heartstring and
then another.
"You should have gone with the others," said young Carrington to
Hastings, reproachfully.
"Never!" said Hastings, decidedly. "There's that drop of comfort in the
whole thing, anyway.
"How do you suppose I should feel," he flashed, "if I were safe on the
surface, and you were here? I should feel as though I had decoyed you
into it." He turned to Trevanion. "Can't the pumps get the water under
control?" he demanded.
"If you had enough of 'em," said Trevanion. "That's another place where
Richards economized. The Star'll pump it out for you after a while."
"Richards will have his day of reckoning if I get out of this," said
Hastings, furiously.
"Does he know that?" asked Trevanion, dryly.
And Hastings saw the point. So did young Carrington. The cards were
Richards' now, to play as he chose. Hastings turned to his friends.
"Ned," he said, "I'm mighty sorry. Sorry I interfered at all. I'd give
my life to have you and Trevanion safe on the surface."
"Don't worry about me," said the lad, quickly.
Trevanion's eyes watched him curiously.
"I want to talk with you about Elenore," Hastings went on, quietly. "I
suppose you know that I love Elenore, Ned?"
Trevanion stepped back a few paces, but he listened intently.
"Do you?" said the lad, simply.
"Do I?" said Hastings, impetuously. "The hardest thing I ever did was
to leave her without telling her I loved her. But you can't ask a girl
like that to wait indefinitely, you know. Then, when I found out where
I was coming, it seemed as though it might have been meant, after all.
And I wanted to patch up the trouble between the mines, so that I'd
have at least a fair chance."
"And then?" said young Carrington, softly.
"Then," said Hastings, recklessly, "I hoped--I was daft enough to
dream--that she might not think it a hardship to come back to the
little place where she was born--to her father--to me. To _me_! And
when I talked of building a bungalow, I thought what it would mean to
bring my wife home to it."
There was silence. Then Hastings shrugged his shoulders.
"I may not have the chance to tell Elenore," he said, bruskly,
half-ashamed of the emotion he had displayed. "It's not quite the same
thing to tell you, old man. I'm afraid there's small chance of our
ever being brothers-in-law, but you wouldn't have objected to me as a
brother, would you?"
"Whatever Elenore wished, I should have wished," the lad said, calmly.
Hastings laughed a short, impatient laugh.
"I suppose we're all egoists," he said. "But I don't mind confessing to
you that it would be easier to face the music if I knew what Elenore
_did_ wish--whether _she_ cared."
There was silence again. Trevanion's figure in the background grew
tense. Then the lad laughed lightly.
"You hadn't asked her, you know," he said, "and Elenore isn't the kind
of a girl to wear her heart on her sleeve. But I know Elenore pretty
well, and I think she cared--really."
Hastings flung his arm in front of his face with a gesture that was
almost boyish.
"Elenore!" he whispered to the cold comfort of his coat sleeve. For
virile youth loves strongly, humanly.
Young Carrington's eyes watched him with a wonderful light. Even the
flickering candlelight showed Trevanion that.
Then Hastings rammed his hands in his pockets and drew a deep breath.
"Thank Heaven, she's on the other side of the ocean! It will be easier
for her, after all. Harder to realize," he said, fervently.
Young Carrington drew a quick breath, a breath of relief. "I thought
you'd feel that way," he said, quietly.
Trevanion stepped out into the drift.
"I want to speak with you a bit," he nodded to young Carrington.
The lad followed him. Hastings, left alone, gave himself up to thoughts
of Elenore. The other side of the rock wall, young Carrington faced
Trevanion, and knew that he knew. Every detail of their surroundings
stood out in the light of that, with sudden distinctness. The great
timbers that walled in the drift, the flickering light of the candles
in their caps--all seemed but the setting for Trevanion's eyes. The
hand he laid on young Carrington's arm was almost reverential in its
touch.
"I've held you in my arms to-day twice," he said, hurriedly. "I don't
understand why it's you, but it's all right." He looked at young
Carrington as one of Jeanne d'Arc's soldiers might have looked.
Young Carrington faced him very quietly.
"I thought 'twas queer, the way you held the child that time,"
Trevanion went on. "And you ride just as you did as a youngster. Will
he come back now if----" he demanded.
Young Carrington nodded gently. "Yes, and he's a splendid fellow." If
the young voice broke for a second, that was all. "He'll help dad to
bear it. It was best for me to come. Best, above all, if this was to
happen." The voice was steady now. "I'm sorry you know, but it would
have been safe with you, anyway."
It was that same confident charm that had conquered Trevanion at the
outset.
"You won't tell _him_?" he questioned, jerking his head toward the
raise.
Young Carrington's head shook a slow negative.
"Not unless at the very last I turn weak and womanish;" and there was a
whimsical touch in the last word.
Then the young figure straightened up with a quick decision.
"And I really think, Trevanion"--young Carrington's voice was light
now--"that I shall make a nice, plucky, manly finish."
Trevanion, following back into the raise, would have cut his heart out
to save that buoyant young life, but his devotion was the pure fealty
of a serf for his sovereign.
They played at bravery after that, each abetting the other.
Young Carrington coaxed Trevanion into telling them mining stories,
wheedled Hastings into all kinds of reminiscences of his boyhood,
assumed their ultimate escape so confidently that Hastings thought it a
genuine hopefulness.
Not so Trevanion. He knew what the spring was that moved young
Carrington to play up to a buoyant part. And he helped, with anecdotes
of wonderful rescues, of escapes just in the nick of time.
He was in the midst of one of the best of these when a little lapping
sound stopped him.
A thin little line of water pulsed gently into the entrance of the
raise.
Mr. Wade had shouted his fruitless commands, in the ascending cage,
all the way to the surface, raging at Richards and his management,
and unconvinced, in spite of a united and profane assurance, of his
inability to stop the cage and go back; furious at him for having
installed such a defective system, and threatening him with dismissal
at the earliest possible moment.
His nephew and his nephew's friend left to danger, while these brutes
were being brought to the surface! He had never suffered such helpless
frenzy in all his neatly adjusted life.
At the surface the cage cleared with magical suddenness. Mr. Wade,
breathless with rage, was fairly dragged out by Richards, and in so
short a time as a signal may be given and obeyed, the cage had again
started downward.
Mr. Wade leaned back against the timbers of the shaft house, with the
exhaustion of relief.
But it was a relief that Richards did not share. This particular kind
of disaster was so frequently recurrent that he knew its possibilities
all too well. And he raged that it should have come just now. It was
such a routine danger that he had not thought of it as a special menace
in taking them down. Casualty, with Mr. Wade involved or witnessing,
had been furthest from his thoughts or desires.
"How long before they will be up?"' Mr. Wade asked, faintly.
Richards, tensely alert, made no answer. The cage had reached the
bottom of the shaft now. He waited a minute--two--three. There was no
sign from below. He himself gave the signal to hoist.
"Are they coming?" demanded Mr. Wade.
Richards shook his head. "I can't say, sir," he said, "but they've
had plenty of time. Either they got in the cage and forgot to
give the signal"--and with Trevanion below this was an unlikely
contingency--"or----" he hesitated.
"Or?" said Mr. Wade, sharply.
"Or the water has cut them off," Richards finished.
"Then----" said Mr. Wade, faintly.
"Reach 'em from the level above," Richards answered. But he thought of
certain contingencies--thought of a good many important things.
There was a crowd of miners now, watching for the cage to appear. The
jargon of Finnish comment sounded to Mr. Wade like the buzzing of bees.
Then the cage came in sight. Empty and dripping wet.
The next second everything was action, and Richards its mainspring. His
orders pelted down like hailstones. Men, tools, paraphernalia, filled
the cage. Other men went racing off on surface errands.
Mr. Wade, paralyzed by his complete ignorance of conditions or
remedies, seemed crushed under the consciousness of casualty. Richards
caught him by the arm and shook him into attention.
"We'll bring them up, if they are alive," he shouted to him, as though
he were deaf.
Then he stepped into the cage, and down it went again. Mr. Wade leaned
back against the wall, motionless, his eyes fixed on the hole where it
had disappeared.
But over all the little town the news was spreading like wildfire.
John Carrington had spent a horrible morning. When the trap came back,
and the stable boy Ike, who was driving, announced that Mr. Ned had
sent him home, John Carrington promptly demanded why.
"I dunno," said the boy. "He said, 'That's all,' so I come."
It couldn't be possible that Ned had gone down the Tray-Spot! Ned,
who had never shown the slightest eagerness to go down the Star. But
what---- And why----
John Carrington fumed, fretted and finally telephoned--to find to
his consternation that Ned was underground. What under heavens had
Trevanion been thinking of, to let him go? John Carrington raged at
him. And what was Ned thinking of? He knew absolutely nothing of
underground conditions. Had Richards decoyed him into it for some
reason? Any reason of Richards was not a good one.
John Carrington hobbled along on his crutch from the divan on the
veranda to the couch in his bedroom, and back again, in a nervous
unrest which made all places equally distasteful to him.
He raged at his own stupidity in letting Ned drive Trevanion over. He
raged at this miserable leg of his that had held him prisoner so long.
He raged at the strength which came back so slowly.
He sent Mrs. Kipley, who came up to remonstrate with him on this
exhausting promenade, back to her kitchen in short order.
"He's fairly beside himself, worrying over Mr. Ned, who ought to have
had more sense than to do such a thing, anyway," she scolded to Hemmy,
feeling that she must vent her own nervousness in wrath upon some one.
"Now what's the matter with you?" she demanded, exasperatedly, for
Hemmy's face was assuming a chalk color.
"To think that _he_ may be in danger!" said Hemmy, with a gulp.
"The only danger you need to worry about is spoiling those doughnuts,"
said Mrs. Kipley, severely.
And Hemmy, condemned for the next half hour to drop little doughy
circles in boiling lard, wondered, as she choked back a sob, why even
the luxury of grief was denied her.
Carrington found solitude fast becoming unbearable.
He sent for Mrs. Kipley. He ordered her to tell Kipley to have the trap
over at the Tray-Spot, and when Ned came up at the noon hour, to tell
him he was needed at home at once.
Kipley had no sooner started than Carrington thought of the lad's
dignity. He would not make a baby of him. He dispatched Ike on Ned's
saddle horse, to tell Kipley to place himself at Mr. Wade's disposal,
to tell Ned to bring Hastings and Mr. Wade back to luncheon, if he
chose; but to telephone him at once from the mine in any case.
He hobbled out on the veranda to wait for noon. He told himself that he
was getting to be an old woman; that Ned was young and strong, and able
to take care of himself anywhere; that Trevanion would keep his eyes
open for any deviltry on Richards' part; that Richards would look after
any party which contained Mr. Wade and Hastings.
Then the sound of galloping hoofs came ominously. Ike, fairly hanging
on the Colonel's neck, came flying homeward.
Disaster was stamped on his terrorized face.
Carrington swung up on his crutch as the boy ran stumblingly up the
walk.
The clatter brought Mrs. Kipley and Hemmy to the door.
"What is it?" Carrington called, sharply.
"Water!" the boy choked. "The Tray-Spot is flooded, and they're down
there."
"Who's down there?" Carrington's words cut.
"The young fellow--Trevanion--and Mr. Ned," Ike sobbed.
Carrington's ashy face worked curiously.
"And Richards?" he demanded.
"Come up and left 'em," moaned the boy.
John Carrington wheeled, strode limpingly, and for the first time
without a crutch, into the house, snatched something that glistened
from the drawer of his desk, and came running rapidly in that uneven,
limping way toward the saddled horse.
"For pity's sake, what are you going to do?" Mrs. Kipley called out, as
he managed, by the aid of the horse block, to get into the saddle.
The face that turned toward her was distorted with fury, but the
twisting lips spoke only two words in a hoarsely guttural cry: "My
boy!" But in them was anguish and revenge.
The Colonel shot forward like a shell from a gun.
Kipley, mingling with the crowd around the shaft house, picking up
every shred of information heavy-heartedly, saw with consternation the
bulky figure pounding toward them on the Colonel. He was beside the
horse's head when John Carrington drew rein.
"They've gone down for 'em," he said, swiftly, and his voice was
weighted with pity: "They're going to get 'em on the level above."
John Carrington gave no sign of hearing him. He was trying to dismount.
"Give me your shoulder," he said, sharply. "This cursed leg----" He
groaned as he came awkwardly and heavily to the ground. Then, steadying
himself by Kipley's shoulder, he hurried in that lunging, uneven way to
the shaft.
He had flung the bridle automatically over the Colonel's head, and that
sagacious animal, well trained as a cavalry horse, stood motionless,
waiting.
Kipley told all he had learned of the story, tersely, as he steadied
him along.
Mr. Wade, waiting numbly by the shaft, found himself confronted by two
men.
"You," said a deep voice, strangling with rage, "came up and left my
son."
Mr. Wade raised his tired eyes to meet John Carrington's bloodshot ones.
"They," said Mr. Wade, mechanically, "came up and left my nephew."
Then the consciousness of who this man was, and what Hastings had done,
awoke in him a sense of pride of blood which restored him in voice and
bearing to some semblance of himself.
"My nephew," he repeated, with a touch of arrogance, "who refused to
save himself and leave your son and your workman." He straightened
himself up with a dignity whose assumed calm hardly covered its pathos.
"As he would, naturally," he finished.
John Carrington's eyes softened.
"I thought he was that kind," he said. "I like him."
Mr. Wade's heart warmed to a man who appreciated his nephew.
"Then my son would have done the same thing for him, in his place,"
John Carrington added, proudly.
Young Carrington was a splendid young fellow, Mr. Wade thought. His
sympathy swept out to his father.
"I'm sure of it," he said. And the two men's hands met.
When Mr. Wade spoke again, it was with a feeling of placing reliance in
John Carrington.
"Are they doing all they can?" he said, simply. "You ought to know."
Carrington's mind swept like a microscope over the details of the
rescuers' plans, as Kipley had given them to him. "Tell me your side of
it," he said.
Mr. Wade told him mechanically.
Carrington pondered it.
"I'm inclined to think they are," he said, at last.
For the conviction forced itself upon him that Richards would do his
best to rescue Hastings. And if there was safety underground, Trevanion
would find it. Time was the uncertain factor. If there was time!
Kipley brought a rough bench, and the two men sat down.
If there was silence between them, there was also the bond of a common
anxiety.
From the moment Richards had seen the three men left on the seventh
level he had seen several other things clearly.
One was that it would be no longer possible to parry the question of
pumping apparatus with Mr. Wade.
Another was that the only thing which could make the possibility of his
continuing as manager of the Tray-Spot worth a straw was the quick,
well-planned rescue of the three men. In the reaction of relief from
casualty, resourcefulness now might plead for him.
And the last was that if Trevanion did not have time to get them up the
first raise, they were caught in some one of those other raises, from
which he had had the ladders removed only the week before.
Everything depended on the progress the three had been able to make,
and the rapidity with which the water was coming.
When the cage dropped to the sixth level, Richards knew from its
solitude that they had not been able to make the first raise, and
Richards' men understood that they were to do their best.
They ran to the second, calling down as they uncovered it: no answer.
And the third: to hear only the hollow reverberation of their own
voices; to see by the light of a falling candle the glint of water in
the bottom. And the fourth: Richards himself, hurrying along in advance
of his men toward the final raise to the south, acknowledged that this
was a last and very slender hope.
As he hallooed down the raise the answering cry came back as swiftly to
his ears as the sight of the three twinkling lights to his eyes. If the
candle in his cap was a star of safety to them, those three lights were
relief to him.
With swift brevity he ordered the ladders, then called down: "We'll
have you up, all right."
And up the blackness came Hastings' voice: "Hurry, for God's sake; it's
ankle deep!"
The first ladder dropped swiftly to the position, to be nailed in place
by the fastest man the Tray-Spot had. Three minutes. The second one
sped down after it. Men stood by with ropes, if ladders should prove
too slow.
Seven minutes, and the third ladder started down. This was rapid work,
but the ropes slid down, as well. The fourth ladder touched the bottom
of the hole.
The water was at their knees when they saw it come. Trevanion had begun
to knot a rope around young Carrington's waist. He flung it off now, to
swing the slight young figure to his shoulders, to set the stiff feet
firmly on the ladder. "I maun take him! 'E can't do it alone!" he said
to Hastings, as he swung himself up after the lad, supporting him.
And it was, in truth, fidelity to young Carrington, not hurry to save
himself before Hastings. Nor did Hastings misunderstand. He would have
gone last, anyway.
But it seemed a long way to the top. He was terribly stiff and wet and
chilled, grateful to the strong hands that lifted him out at last.
He saw Trevanion ahead, half carrying Ned, refusing to let anyone else
touch the lad.
It seemed to him that he followed more because he was led along than
because of any will of his own. They were in the cage now, going up,
and the cheers of the miners with them rose before them.
It would mean but one thing to those on the surface; a thing that made
two haggard-faced, gray-headed men stand shaken with emotion as the
cage came in sight.
To Mr. Wade the other faces were but a blur around Hastings; to
Carrington nothing was clear but his son's face, chilled blue-white, as
the lad leaned in utter weariness against Trevanion.
Neither man saw Richards, nor heard his bluff "All safe!" But the
waiting crowd, heedless of old animosities for the moment, took up the
cheer. It served as chorus when John Carrington, catching Ned's icy
hands in his, said, hoarsely: "Thank God!"--when the lad, striving to
smile his wonted brave smile, answered: "I do, dad;" when Trevanion,
crying: "'E must keep movin'!" swept young Carrington along to where
the Colonel stood patiently waiting, and, lifting him into the saddle,
held him with one hand as he ran alongside, urging the animal into a
gentle trot; when John Carrington, impatient to follow, and turning
for Kipley's shoulder to steady him, saw Mr. Wade, his face pinched
with suspense and fatigue, resting rather heavily on Hastings' arm, saw
Hastings, gray-drab with fag, looking about for a vehicle of some sort.
If John Carrington's heartstrings pulled tenaciously toward home, it
was not visible in the cordial insistence with which he drove Hastings
and Mr. Wade to their car.
"I count on you both for lunch tomorrow," he called, as he left them at
that haven of refuge.
Then he gripped Kipley's arm.
"Drive like the devil!" he whispered, hoarsely.
The ride had shaken the chill from young Carrington's blood, but
Trevanion refused to leave him until he saw him safely in the house.
At the door young Carrington turned and laid his hand lightly and
firmly on Trevanion's arm.
"You're splendid, Trevanion," he said, gently; "I shan't forget."
And Trevanion, turning away, would have given his heart's blood for
just that.
Mrs. Kipley bore down upon them, bustlingly energetic, a glass of
whisky in one hand and a telegram in the other. Hemmy, red-eyed,
lingered in the offing.
Young Carrington tossed off the whisky, tore open the envelope, and,
calling to Trevanion, who was halfway down the steps, sped to him and
spoke low and rapidly.
Trevanion nodded. Young Carrington, coming back, was smiling rather
tremulously.
"Not a thing, thanks," he said, to Mrs. Kipley's offer of assistance.
"All I need is a bath and a rest. In the morning I shall be
quite--myself."
He laughed an odd, gay little laugh.
"You don't feel any bone ache?" said Mrs. Kipley, anxiously, as he went
up the stairs.
Young Carrington looked down gleefully.
"I feel--relieved," he said.
"I don't wonder," said Mrs. Kipley, to Hemmy, who was altering a
determination to enter a convent into a desire to be a trained nurse.
But Mrs. Kipley and young Carrington were not thinking of the same
predicament.
For the telegram read:
Shall arrive Yellow Dog nine to-night; your trunk with me.
John Carrington, his abused leg stretched out on a chair in front of
him, was smoking a final cigar for the night, in the big downstairs
bedroom.
He was resting one elbow on his desk; and the head that leaned upon
his hand was full of plans for his son's future. He was safe upstairs,
thank God! He was snug in bed and sleeping when his father got home.
And he left him to sleep off his fatigue, though he was impatient to
talk with him.
The clock over the fireplace chimed the half hour after nine. There was
the sound of quick steps on the veranda, then in the hall. A murmur of
voices. One was Trevanion's. "The room at the head of the hall," he
heard his undertone. Some one ran up the stairs, and some one closed
the hall door gently and went down the steps.
John Carrington was out in the hall the next instant. He heard the door
of Ned's room open. He stumped up the stairs.
Light came through a half-opened door. A murmur of voices and laughing
greeting came to him.
Ned, fully dressed, as though he were the newcomer, had his arms around
some one who was sitting up in bed.
"Dear old girl! What a brick you are!" Carrington heard Ned say.
"Trevanion told me."
"Ned!" he cried, uncomprehendingly.
The boy swung round joyously.
"Dad!" he shouted, and there was glad greeting in his tone. "You bully
old dad!"
He caught his father by the hand and shoulder with both his hands, but
John Carrington held him off mechanically.
For the figure sitting up in bed, flushed, mischievous and laughing at
his bewilderment, was Ned!
The hands that grasped John Carrington's arm and shoulder gripped him,
shook him slightly.
"She's been ripping, perfectly ripping, dad, and I'm four months late,
but be a little glad to see me," this Ned's laughing voice went on.
"She----" John Carrington stammered.
Ned waved a genial hand toward the figure in the bed.
"Miss Elenore Carrington, the most successful self-made man in
history!" he announced, with a flourish.
When Miss Elenore Carrington opened her eyes the following morning,
it was to gaze contentedly from her bed at a large, square,
hotel-placarded object in the center of her room.
Objectively, it was merely an uncommonly good-sized trunk, but
subjectively, it stood for Femininity, sweetly personal and newly
reincarnated.
"But what do you suppose he put in?" murmured Miss Carrington. And
uncertainty became unbearable.
She shook her fist gayly at a masculine-looking bathrobe hanging over
the back of a chair. "I won't put you on again, even to _look_!" she
announced, with a gayly menacing flourish.
She caught the coverings of the bed around her, and was out in a great
white splash on the floor, fumbling with the key in the lock.
The trunk lid flew open, and she knelt, looking like a boyish little
novice, in the plain white night garment, with the big splash of white
spreading all over the floor about her.
She had that floor strewn with her treasures. Lovely frilly feminine
garments, dainty slippers all buckle and heel, dear little everyday
frocks and lingerie blouses, and gowns for occasions in the big trays
beneath. She laughed and blessed Ned as she delved down.
And hats--actually all her hats! But alack-a-day! She clutched her
shorn locks with a grimace. And that square package--toilet things;
useless hairpins and unusable jeweled shell combs; and here, in tissue
paper--oh, the forethought of Ned!--the very locks of hair of which she
had shorn herself so recklessly, bound together by the hairdresser's
skill into a lustrous coil that had distinct possibilities.
She looked at it with an admiration such as she had never felt when it
was growing on her own head.
She swathed herself in the laciest and swirliest of pale blue silk
negligees, and sped to the mirror to experiment.
An hour later. Miss Elenore Carrington, daintily fresh as a
morning-glory, brown hair coiled closely at the back of her head
and pompadoured loosely around a face worthy of its best efforts;
garbed in a fetching little morning frock of white linen elaborately
embroidered, and short enough to permit the eye of man to rejoice over
the well-shaped _chaussure_ which supported a high-arched instep in a
deliciously restful way--Miss Carrington, in short, not only in her
right mind but in her right clothes, stood looking out of her window
at a world glowing with the glory of the September sun.
Her lips curved smilingly as she thought of many things: of her
father's surprise the night before, of the long, long talk and the
flood of explanations which had lasted far into the night, and brought
them into a completeness of understanding which had meant happiness to
them all.
Ned had told them what those months in the East had done for him, not
only in technique but in inspiration; how, returning to Paris, he
found that his salon portrait had brought him a commission to paint a
certain crown prince that coming winter; how Velantour, pleased as he
was himself, had shouted "_Deja!_"--a much prettier "_deja_" than the
famous one--and had added: "Now you will paint his soul in his face,
his responsibilities in his clothes, and his destiny in the background."
How, too, returning to Paris, he had found Elenore's letters, telling
him that things were going on successfully in her imposture; and how,
getting her things together as hastily as possible, he had come to
relieve her on the fastest greyhound afloat, determining remorsefully
to give up even the crown prince if his father needed him.
Needed him! John Carrington was so proud of his talent that he would
have cut off his right hand before he would have kept him.
Then they had discussed the exigencies of the present; how the thing
was to be played out. Elenore insisted that no one should know; Ned
that everyone should; he wanted no more credit that didn't belong to
him. John Carrington, considering it the cleverest thing that had ever
happened, would have blazoned it on the stars.
They compromised: first, that the Kipleys should be told, a plan which
had everything in its favor; second, that Hastings and Mr. Wade should
know. This was the battleground.
Even when Elenore had yielded the question of Hastings, she objected
strenuously to Mr. Wade's enlightenment. He wouldn't understand. But
easygoing Ned turned dogged.
"If you had only _seen_ him, you'd know how appalling he'd think it,"
Elenore had defended.
"When I see him to-morrow, I'll meditate on the best way to break it to
him," Ned had retorted.
"But you'll wait a little," she coaxed.
"Oh, I'll give you time to get in a bit of work," he conceded.
Miss Elenore Carrington, looking out of the window, grew suddenly
dreamy-eyed.
Over on the far hill, a branch of hard maple had turned brilliantly
scarlet. But it could hardly have been its reflection that brought the
delicate stain into Miss Carrington's cheeks. Oddly enough, it was on
that particular hill that Hastings had planned to build his bungalow.
It was a morning of merriment, of buoyancy, of stupefactions.
Mr. Kipley was fairly swamped by the last emotion. He sat on the steps
of the side porch, and only a medical expert could have told that his
condition was not merely comatose.
All that saved Mrs. Kipley was the urgency of preparing a suitable
lunch for "those New York folks."
Even then she discovered herself doing the most remarkable things.
"I'll bake the ice cream next," she remarked to Hemmy. Hemmy, used to
the startling changes of romance, adjusted herself to the situation
with apparent ease--and a new dream of bliss.
For had not Mr. Ned said, jubilantly: "Jove, this air is pure ozone!
I want to paint everything in sight. You, too, Hemmy, in that
pink-checked gown."
Painters fell in love with their models sometimes.
John Carrington fairly basked in happiness. Only one thing troubled
him, and when he caught Elenore alone for a moment that came out. He
took her hands in his and looked into her blue eyes lovingly.
"I told you once," he said, gently, "that no daughter could be so dear
to a man as his son."
"Yes, dad," she said, frankly.
He bent and kissed her forehead.
"I was wrong," he said.
Then they spoke of other things.
"How is young Mr. Carrington this morning?" said Mr. Wade, stepping
into the trap, to Mr. Kipley, driving. "None the worse for yesterday, I
hope?"
Mr. Kipley's face contorted, as though he were about to sneeze.
"He's lookin' about the same," he replied, and his voice sounded
muffled. He seemed to derive such inward satisfaction from the phrase
that he repeated it: "He's lookin' about the same. I don't think it
hurt him none." And immediately gave his attention to his horses.
John Carrington was on the veranda to receive them.
"This is a gala day," he told them, as he grasped their hands in warm
welcome. "My other child came home last night."
Hastings' heart leaped.
"Your daughter?" said Mr. Wade, politely. And with his words Elenore
came forward to meet them.
She had doffed the linen gown of the morning for the delicately
elaborate one she had last worn at that farewell tea in Paris.
There was the faintest suggestion of shyness in the gracefully smiling
welcome she gave Mr. Wade, which suited that particular old gentleman
to a T.
"You have every reason to be proud of both your children," he said,
affably, to John Carrington.
"I am," John Carrington replied, and he meant it.
Hastings, wordlessly happy to feel Elenore's hand resting lightly in
his, pressed it tenderly as he tried to look into the eyes he had so
longed to see.
Her long lashes veiled them distractingly.
Then she raised them to his with a certain laughing mockery which was
delicious but baffling.
"Have I changed much?" she demanded, lightly.
"I shall have to look a long time to find out," said Hastings. His
voice shook a little.
She laughed with sweet spontaneity.
"I shall not waste myself on anyone with such a disgracefully bad
memory," she said, with mock reproach. "I shall devote myself to your
uncle."
She turned to Mr. Wade and proceeded to make her word good.
Mr. Wade found himself sitting on a broad, shady veranda, talking to
as pretty a girl as he had seen in years; talking, as he felt with a
commendable thrill of pride, his very best. What a listener she was!
How graceful! How super-feminine! How ready-witted!
She agreed with him, and Mr. Wade felt even more agreeably conscious
than usual of his own good judgment. She disagreed daintily. It was
exhilarating to show her where she was wrong.
"If I were twenty years younger!" said Mr. Wade to himself, which was
a little more than half the number he should have stated, but what
elderly gentleman is exactly accurate in such statements!
He looked sharply at Hastings, and something in the divided attention
his nephew was giving John Carrington seemed to please him.
There was a flutter of Hemmy's apron in the doorway.
"Ned will join us in the dining room," said John Carrington, genially.
Ned was, in fact, standing on its threshold.
He greeted them with gay good fellowship.
"I'm glad to see you looking so well after yesterday," Mr. Wade assured
him.
Ned flashed a frank, bright smile at him.
"I'm as fresh as though yesterday had never happened," he said, gayly,
"and we're going to keep conversation on pleasanter things through
luncheon, on Elenore's account."
Mr. Wade nodded. "Of course," he said, "we must not alarm the young
lady with what might have been."
And the chatter that ensued was, in truth, gay and bright and full of
reminiscences of the life the three young people had enjoyed in Paris.
If Mr. Wade had ever tasted better fried chicken, he had forgotten
where, and he praised it with an emphasis that turned Mrs. Kipley, who
was helping Hemmy wait on table, a deep magenta with suppressed pride.
He approved highly, too, of the champagne cup, and when Elenore
confessed its concoction, declared gallantly that that explained its
excellence.
"Indeed, I imagine that you succeed in whatever you do," he added, as
the string to his floral bouquet.
They were at the coffee-and-cordial stage of proceedings now, and Mrs.
Kipley and Hemmy had disappeared on their laurels.
"She does, Mr. Wade," said Ned, gayly, "and she attempts appallingly
difficult things at that. Would you like to hear about her star
performance?"
"I would, indeed," said Mr. Wade, heartily.
And Elenore, with a look at her brother, knew that the moment had come.
"Then I shall leave you to your cigars," she said, lightly, pushing
back her chair, in the instinct to escape.
For back of the lightness, excitement, altogether too insecurely
barred, was making a dash for liberty.
But Ned was on his feet as well, and caught her firmly but lightly
around the waist as she tried to pass him.
"You'll have to stay and help me out," he said, with mock reproach.
"How do you expect a man who only arrived last night to tell it
straight?"
Even then they thought he must have mis-spoken himself.
But Elenore turned with her hand on his shoulder and faced them
buoyantly.
"There was once a Rising Genius, who had one great, glorious
opportunity," she began. "He had, too, a sister whom the gods hadn't
dowered with talent of any kind; and a father----"
"Who not only fractured his leg," John Carrington broke in, "but got
fractious in other ways as well. And, not knowing of the opportunity,
insisted on his son's coming home."
"So the sister, who was perfectly bully, and the pluckiest girl----"
Ned began.
But Elenore interposed.
"He was perfectly willing to come," she insisted to them. "Don't
forget that." She slipped from his arm and swept them the daintiest of
courtesies.
She touched the elaborate chiffon quillings of her skirt with daintily
approving fingers. "I never knew the sustaining and soothing influence
of feminine attire until I was bereft of it," she assured them,
laughingly. "I shall be distractingly fond of frills all the rest of my
life. Wasn't it horrid underground!" she flashed; and they heard the
swish of her retreating skirts.
Hastings gripped Ned suddenly by the arm.
"You weren't down the mine with me yesterday?" he demanded.
"Pullman, Lower 8, from Chicago," said that young gentleman, serenely.
"Then I _shall_ be your brother-in-law," he ejaculated, and vanished
like a shot.
Mr. Wade's expression approached imbecility.
"Do you mean to tell me----" he began, numbly.
"That I only came last night, but my sister has been here all summer,"
said Ned, concisely.
The air came in refreshingly through the opened windows. Elenore was
standing, one arm on the back of a chair. She smiled slightly as
Hastings came toward her impetuously.
"It was quite a composite speech, wasn't it?" she said.
He covered the hand on the back of the chair with his own.
"I can't realize it," he said. "You--all that time."
"It seemed quite a long time, too," she confessed.
"You underground!" he went on. "I should have died of anxiety if I had
suspected it."
"I wanted to tell you dreadfully," she murmured. "There's no harm in
owning now that I was afraid."
The hand that held hers closed over it more tightly.
"There's no harm now," he said, tensely, "in telling me if you meant
what you said: that you thought Elenore cared for me."
"There's no particular harm now," she parodied, daringly, with downcast
eyes, "in your telling Elenore now what you told her then."
He swept her into his arms with a tender forcefulness. "That I love
her. Elenore! Elenore!"
The full red lips that his own found, breathlessly, were mysteriously,
maddeningly sweet. And those deep blue eyes--what marvelous things they
confessed to him!
"The dear little bungalow!" he whispered. "But we needn't wait for it,
Elenore. Marry me soon, and we'll build it afterward."
She laughed deliciously.
The sound of steps in the hall came to them, and Hastings drew her
to the vantage ground of a corner as Mr. Wade and the Carringtons,
_pere et fils_, came in view outside the windows to seat themselves
comfortably in the big veranda chairs.
"And," said Mr. Wade, in high good humor, and evidently continuing a
conversation begun at the table, "it shouldn't be difficult for you and
your son-in-law to arrange the management of the two mines amicably
between you."
"Aren't you getting on rather rapidly?" John Carrington demanded, with
a twinkle in his eye.
"Not as rapidly as Laurence would like to, I'll wager," Mr. Wade said,
with confidence.
Then he polished his eyeglasses with his handkerchief. "I have always
had a great admiration for the heroines of Shakespeare--_Rosalind_,
in particular," he said, with a hint of pedantic precision; "but I
consider Miss Elenore more charming still."
"My idea, exactly," murmured Hastings.
"As long as you've settled it all for them, you two," said Ned, with
confidential raillery, "perhaps you'd better hurry up the great event,
so it can take place before I go back to Paris. Everything has to be
sacrificed to my career, you know."
He spoke with light mockery.
Hastings' arm tightened around Elenore, and his pleading lost none of
its force because it was silent.
The head on his shoulder gave a sudden gay, bewitching little nod.
"We consent to sacrifice ourselves," Hastings called, jubilantly.
And the sound of applause drifted in through the open windows.
In her castle by the sea
Dwelt the daughter of the king;
Sweet and beautiful was she
As a morn in Spring.
Lovers had she, young and old,
Princes foolish, princes wise,
Lured by all the love untold
In her tender eyes.
By her window in the tower
Once she sat and listened long--
Fairer she than any flower
That inspires a song!
Far below her, in his boat,
Sang the poet, and her name
Soaring in a silver note
Through the window came.
Just a simple lyric, yet
Fashioned with such perfect art
Nevermore could she forget
How it thrilled her heart.
She will never wed a prince,
Though the king's own choice he were;
Life holds something dearer since
Love's self sang to her.
_By Mary H. Vorse_
What makes the boom go sheering up in the air in that silly way?" Mrs.
Massingbyrd asked me.
"It's trying to gooseneck," I told her. "And if you would like me to
take the tiller----" Now, how foolish this suggestion was, I ought to
have known.
"Not at all," Mrs. Massingbyrd briskly cut me short, pulling the tiller
smartly toward her to emphasize her refusal.
The boat jibed, and the next thing we were both in the water. Mrs.
Massingbyrd's shining head came to the surface a few feet from mine.
She shook the water from her eyes, gasped for breath once or twice, and
then with a magnificent affectation of composure:
"Something told me I ought to wear my bathing suit," she remarked,
reflectively.
"It was vanity told you," I replied with irritation. Nothing had told
me I ought to wear mine. It was just like Lydia Massingbyrd to wear
a bathing suit to get capsized in. I've never known a woman who so
infallibly landed on her feet.
"I think," she continued, complacently, as we struck out for the shore,
not far distant, "I chose a very nice place for spilling us. I know
women who would have been capable of doing it in the middle of Long
Island Sound!"
"It would have been still more considerate if you'd chosen a spot near
the mainland to show your seamanship," I suggested, with polite sarcasm.
"I thought that all wrecks always took place near Huckleberry Island. I
thought that was one of the things one _did_." Her voice was a trifle
aggrieved, she smiled at me, a smile like a little flickering flame.
"She needn't," I thought, "try to put the comether on me." Suspenders
are in the way when swimming, and my heavy, rubber-soled shoes helped
to spoil my temper.
"Of course," I gloomily returned, "our lunch is now at the bottom of
the Sound." I knew that would fetch her. I have never seen a woman who
has so retained a child's unimpaired appetite. Mrs. Massingbyrd turned
an uneasy eye on the catboat, which, buoyed by its sail, was floating
on its side like some great, awkward, wounded bird.
Mrs. Massingbyrd's feet struck the sandy beach off Huckleberry Island.
"But we can't sit here all day, you know, on a desert island, with
nothing to eat," she remonstrated, as she made her way to the shore.
"You must do something about it, Bobby. I call it tragic, simply
tragic, to think of all that good lunch put out of our reach."
She was by now quite on dry land, and with great expedition pulled the
shell pins from her lovely and extraordinary hair.
The jealous say that Mrs. Massingbyrd's strength, like Samson's, rests
in her hair. It is that meek, silvery gold color that usually has
neither kink nor curl, but in her case it curled riotously, broke out
at the nape of her neck in absurd babyish ringlets and at her temples.
"So that was why you upset us?" I asked, irritably. "I would have taken
your word for it that it did."
"Did what?" she queried, rising promptly to the bait.
"Come down to your knees, I mean."
"You might know that not for anything in the world, with hair as thick
and as hard to dry as mine, would I wet it unnecessarily!" she flashed.
"It's a mercy it's so fine," I quoth, maliciously, "or you would
never get it up at all." Mrs. Massingbyrd is notoriously vain of her
wonderful hair.
"You might have spared yourself all the trouble," I continued,
cuttingly, as I took off my collar, and began on my shoes. "It's
not nearly as nice a color all soaked and wet; in fact, it's rather
unpleasant and seaweedy!"
"Wait until it's dry," she triumphed, radiantly. "You may in the end be
glad you came. But _I_ won't!" she continued. "There's nothing in it
for me! _You're_ not going to present a sight for sore eyes now or at
any other portion of the day! And there's nothing to eat!"
"You're a vain and greedy woman, Lydia Massingbyrd," I said, severely.
"And it would serve you right if the lockers of Mason's boat were empty
instead of being garnished with cans of soup and meat, as I suspect
them to be." And I started forth to rescue the capsized boat, but the
tide had carried it on the reef, the mast caught between two rocks,
and, already strained as it was, it cracked and broke.
And I was due to meet my wife and some other friends off Rye in a
couple of hours. That's what comes of going off on a lady's sailing
party, each man to be sailed down by a girl. A foolish idea, and
hatched out, you may be sure, in the crazy pates of Felicia and her
friend, Lydia Massingbyrd.
I did what I could for the poor boat. It's a light little thing, an
eighteen-foot cat, and, as I've often told Mason, heavily oversparred.
I got her on the beach without much trouble, while my companion
inquired anxiously, from time to time, as to the state of the larder.
I found I was right. There was soup, and shortly I was warming it by
means of a wire cleverly slung around it and a wooden handle. For,
luckily, my match case was watertight.
"Necessity is the mother of invention," said I, taking my companion
into favor again.
"Necessity is the mother of indigestion!" she retorted, and I saw her
mind was back with our shipwrecked flesh-pots. "I can't bear canned
things!"
She spread her long, wet hair around her like a mantle; the corners
of her mouth drooped with a pathetic quiver, changed their mind and
flickered out into a radiant little smile, which in its turn gave way
to a long chuckle.
"I never quite understood about jibing," she remarked. "But now I
understand perfectly. It's about the suddenest thing I know. I've a
very objective mind. A thing has to be put before me actually, in the
flesh, for me to comprehend it. That's what I shall tell the reporters."
"Reporters?" I wondered.
"Reporters, of course," she repeated. "And the longer we're out here,
the more there'll be! They won't begin to hunt for us until to-night.
It's a good thing Felicia is my lifelong friend;" and Mrs. Massingbyrd
laughed again. The situation had none of the serious aspects to her
that it had to me. Of course Felicia was Lydia Massingbyrd's friend,
but no woman cares to have her husband absent and missing with another
woman, and what with the anxiety and reporters and all--no, I didn't
look forward to the next two or three days.
Mrs. Massingbyrd's spirits rose during lunch.
"After a swim canned things aren't really so awful," she conceded. "I
suppose they'll tell the police and get out searchlights. I've had most
things happen to me, but this is quite brand new."
"One would think you were a popular actress," I complained.
"Well, so, in a way, I am," she philosophized.
Her hair was drying fast, and hung about her a dress of living gold.
Her black silk bathing suit fitted her closely in all the places it
ought not to. I marveled that so slender a little creature could be
at the same time so deliciously rounded. Her face, ever so slightly
tanned, had all sorts of delicious golden tones, her eyes were
surprisingly blue and as candidly innocent as those of a delightful
child. In her short skirt and her golden hair, so meek in its color, so
wayward in its curls, she looked like a little girl.
"Lydia Massingbyrd," I found myself saying spontaneously, "I forgive
you everything! And it's a lucky thing for me I'm deeply in love with
Felicia."
"I told you you'd be glad you came," she said, joyously.
"It was worth the price," I generously conceded. "Your lovely mane is
all you have pretended it was. 'It's all wool'!"
"A sail!" cried Mrs. Massingbyrd, pointing to a yawl that even as she
spoke had rounded the island.
"It's the Phillips' yawl," I agreed.
"Conscientiously, I don't suppose we can stay shipwrecked any longer
than we can help. We'll have to give up the reporters!" There was a
note of disappointment in her voice. "Shout, Bobby!"
I shouted.
"They don't hear us. What we need is a flag of distress. Wave, wave
your coat!" Then catching her long hair in both her hands, she held it
far above her head and waved it like a golden banner. The wind caught
it and played with it; in her eager abandon she looked like some Maenad,
some fire spirit--choose your own simile for her, but in that moment
out there in the full sunlight she had I know not what touch of the
superterrestrial.
I believe at that moment it was given to me to see her at the highest
point of her somewhat amazing beauty. As she stood there her hand was
holding her wonderful hair above her head; she was for a moment outside
the pale of everyday womanhood. She was, I tell you, something to
commit follies for.
They saw us. The boat put about. Mrs. Massingbyrd let fall the most
original and the most beautiful flag that ever waved distress.
"They've recognized me," she remarked with satisfaction. She held a
strand of hair high above her head and let it fall. "There isn't anyone
who could have done that."
"Or who would have done it if they could," I added, severely.
"Or who would have done it if they could," she agreed. "Not all women
are so conscientious as to what they owe mankind."
"Indeed they are not," I put in, sarcastically.
She was on her knees, gathering her hairpins and combs.
"Let your light so shine before men," said she, cheerfully. "A city
that's built on a hill cannot be hid. Don't put your candle under a
bushel."
I was putting on my shoes--now fairly well dried--and my ruined collar,
just to show I had one.
"I suppose you're the vainest woman on the seacoast," I scolded. I am
the only man in all Lydia Massingbyrd's acquaintance who never flatters
her, and who from time to time gives her the great benefit of hearing
the whole truth about herself.
"I suppose I am, and good reason, too;" and there was some heat in her
voice. Her back was toward me; all I could see of her was a mass of
silvery gold.
"Now, what shall I do?" she asked. "There's plenty of time to put
up my hair any which way--it would look horrid--I look so nice like
this--now, what would you do?"
"You ought to put it up," I conclusively told her. "It's an indecent
exposure. One would think, to look at you, that you were playing
tableaux of Lady Godiva."
"I shall never get such another chance," she implored.
"Put up your hair, Lydia Massingbyrd," I commanded.
"I've always wanted to do this," she moaned. "And now just as there's
going to be any good in it you bully me." Her mouth dropped again, she
looked at me with appealingly candid eyes.
"Oh, have it your way," I growled. "Show off before Phillips, and
Almington, and little Cecilia Bennett, and Mrs. Day, and the Drake
boys!"
"Almington!" exclaimed Mrs. Massingbyrd. "That settles it!" and she
resolutely shook out her hair again.
"Almington!" I exclaimed, in amazement. "Why does Almington settle it?"
"I can't bear the man!" cried she, stamping her foot.
"Oh, well, if this is by way of punishment----"
"Cecilia Bennett's sister is one of my dearest friends." Apparently she
thought this was an explanation.
"And so you want Cecilia to see you with your hair down," I sneered.
"Men are _too_ dense!" was all she vouchsafed me. "He's a popinjay of a
professional heart-breaker."
"I suppose you'll know what they'll say about you?" I tried another
tack.
"I know what they'll think," she told me, with her inimitable calm.
"If you have the nerve, it's no business of mine," I conceded.
"Felicia'll be so busy scolding me that she'll forget all about you,"
she suggested, naively.
"There's something in that," I was manly enough to confess.
The boat now lay-to in the shallow water. Phillips hailed us.
"You'll have to put your hair up," I told her. "They've got no dinghy.
We'll have to swim for it."
"And wet myself all over again? No, indeed; you'll have to carry me,"
she calmly announced. "They can come inshore as far as that."
"You'll have to square me with Felicia," I muttered.
Laughingly Lydia Massingbyrd made a rope of her hair, to keep it safe
from the water, that she might the better blind the poor wretches in
the boat with its radiance. So carry her I did. As we were well out in
the water I heard the snap of Almington's camera.
"Won't Felicia be in a wax?" the incorrigible woman giggled in my ear.
"It's lucky for you it's me," I said to her, critically. "Even as it
is, it's most imprudent!"
She looked at me, an impudent gleam in her eye.
"I'm mighty careful in choosing my company when I'm cast away on a
desert island," said she.
"I don't understand women at all," I rather rashly confessed to Felicia.
"That's all the better for us--I mean for me," she threw back at me.
"But I do understand you're all a matchmaking lot," I continued,
severely.
"Oh, we're a matchmaking lot, are we?" Felicia's tone was one of
flattering interest. She was arranging a bit of vine that had somehow
gotten torn down. She now turned toward me, the picture of innocent
surprise.
"You like matchmaking for the fun of the thing--just as a man likes
shooting," I went on. "You'd marry any person to any other person,
regardless of age, position or----"
"Sex?" suggested Felicia, politely.
"Suitability," I amended; "just for the sake of having a wedding."
"You're talking now in the manner and tone of a husband," Felicia
accusingly told me. "Anyone who heard your voice afar off would know
you were one." I paid no attention to Felicia's interruption.
"If I'm not right, kindly tell me if Lydia Massingbyrd wasn't
matchmaking when she got you to ask Almington and little Cecilia
Bennett down here; and if you weren't matchmaking when you consented to
ask them."
"Undoubtedly it's because Lydia is anxious to arrange a marriage
between them she wanted them here." Felicia's tone was so guilelessly
axiomatic that it made me uncomfortable.
"Has she told you?"
"She's told me nothing," Felicia assured me. "If she'd told me her
reasons I couldn't, as she very well knows, have asked them."
"And that's why I say," I concluded, "that I don't understand women.
First Lydia Massingbyrd told me she couldn't bear Almington. Then she
did her little Venus-rising-from-the-sea act for his benefit. And then,
I tell you, Felicia, if ever a mortal woman flirted, it was your little
golden-locked friend. And, Jove, she was pretty!"
"What Lydia Massingbyrd needs is a husband," Felicia declared, "who
would keep her from tampering with other people's! You've been utterly
ruined ever since you went around that day carrying Lydia all over the
place. You talk about her hair in your sleep."
Again I ignored Felicia and her unjust accusations. "Poor little
Cecilia Bennett! Between admiration and fear she was almost frightened
to death."
"Cecilia is a nice, upstanding, decent little girl," Felicia asserted,
aggressively.
"So she is, so she is," I hastened to agree. "And that is why--she
being only two months out of Farmington--you want to marry her to a man
like Almington!"
"What's wrong with Almington?" asked Felicia, still in her most
guileless manner, which I have learned to know is the most finished
form of impertinence.
"What's the matter with Almington?" I exclaimed. "Oh, nothing at all!
He's the stuff perfect husbands are made of. He's ripe, is Almington,
for a little, innocent flower of a girl like Cecilia."
"Almington's lots of money," said Felicia, reflectively; "and Cecilia's
mother's keen for it. You know there's no end to the Bennett girls, and
they're poor as anything."
I maintained a disgusted silence, for I had an inkling that Felicia
would have been charmed with an outbreak from me about the iniquity of
sacrificing young girls on the altar of Mammon. I therefore resolved to
commit myself no further.
It was at this moment that Mrs. Massingbyrd arrived.
The two ladies embraced. Then Felicia held her friend at arms' length.
"Remember," she warned, "no Croquemitaine! I've done two things for
you--what you wanted me to--and I've asked no questions. So go ahead,
but no Lady Godiva here under my roof-tree. No, nor any coming out
shrieking burglars at two with your hair down, Lydia Massingbyrd!" And
Felicia gave her friend an affectionate shake.
I had the sense that there had passed between the two women
intelligences far beyond what appeared on the surface; a feeling that
there were in the air all kinds of things--and that these things had
passed over my head. In fact, I felt hopelessly at a disadvantage, as a
man so often does in the presence of his wife and his wife's intimate
friend; in a word, I suppose I felt like a husband, and I was glad
enough to join young Drake, who had come up in the same train with
little Cecilia Bennett.
As we strolled off together--
"There's something awfully nice about a really fresh young girl, when
one's been knocking around with older women a bit," he confided to me.
"There's nothing as charming as an unspoiled girl," I agreed. "And
Cecilia is that."
"I don't know but the French way is the best. I hate a young girl who's
too darned knowing."
Now, I knew that Ellery Drake had made calf love to Felicia when
Felicia herself had been a young girl of the kind he so eloquently
described as "too darned knowing"; and that he had in vain followed the
fascinating wake of Mrs. Massingbyrd. So it was not without malice I
replied:
"Oh, the less a little, young girl knows the better; give me a _tabula
rara_ any time."
Ellery Drake looked at me sharply. "I shouldn't go as far as that," he
said. "But I like them like Cecilia--so awfully interested in things
you know, and a little bit shy, and all that. Gee! Did you see her
stare when you toted Mrs. Massingbyrd into the boat the other day?"
"No wonder," I said. "You don't see things like that every day."
"She's a wonder, Mrs. Massingbyrd"--Drake was full of enthusiasm--"but
almost _too_ spectacular for a quiet man. I think Cecilia was really a
little shocked."
I had noted poor little Cecilia's
what-have-we-here-and-whatever-is-the-world-coming-to expression.
There's nothing quite as conventional as your properly-brought-up young
person; and Cecilia was as perfectly turned out a specimen as a wise
mother and a good school could accomplish. She was, in fact, the beau
ideal of the young person for whom we keep our magazines spotlessly
pure, and in whose behalf we cry aloud when a play is not better than
it should be.
"She said afterward," Drake told me, "that she felt as if she'd been
reading one of those society papers that haven't the best reputation in
the world."
"I didn't know she was up to that," I remarked.
"Oh, you don't know Cecilia. She's really very funny when you get her
alone," Drake protested. "I've known her ever since I was knee-high,
so, you see, she's not a bit shy with me. When she was a little kid,
I'd no idea she'd turn out so pretty. The trouble is, they get spoiled
so soon," Drake gloomily went on--"spoiled and knowing and worldly."
"You can't expect a flower to keep in bud forever."
"But you can train it to be a nice, sweet, modest, homekeeping plant,
or an exotic thing trained for the flower show."
He puffed at his cigarette. I saw he thought he'd gotten off a good
thing. When I'm with Drake I understand only too well the kind of
amusement I so frequently afford Felicia. He enhanced the resemblance
by now saying:
"I don't understand women at all!"
"No?" I encouraged him.
"What the devil is a sweet little thing like Cecilia Bennett doing
messing around with a fellow like Almington?"
"He'll soon take off the bloom," I said.
If the women were going to match-make, it occurred to me I could do
a little work of the kind off my own bat, and I was pleased with my
dexterity when Drake enthusiastically snatched at the bait.
"You bet he will," he said. "He's not the man for a young girl like
Cecilia; nothing more than a baby, you know, who doesn't know how to
take care of herself. Though I've nothing against Almington. He's all
right for married women."
"A perfect companion for Felicia and Mrs. Massingbyrd," I sarcastically
threw in, but my sarcasm didn't touch Ellery Drake, for he said, simply:
"Oh, he's all right for _them_!"
"So," I said, magnanimously, "let them take care of him. He's coming
down to-night, and you keep Cecilia out of his clutches."
Roars of mirth, in which I distinguished the voices of my wife, Mrs.
Massingbyrd and Cecilia, now interrupted us, and they all came running
across the lawn like a troop of charming, grown-up children.
Indeed, Felicia and Mrs. Massingbyrd seemed younger than their little
companion. I've told you that Lydia Massingbyrd has the youngest, most
candid eyes I've ever seen; and she and Felicia ran down the lawn with
the abandon of those who know their world.
Spontaneity is one of civilization's most perfect flowers, and Cecilia
wasn't as yet civilized enough to have acquired it. She followed the
others with a certain dry rigidity that I found perfectly charming for
her age and the time she had been in the world.
"No, no; you can't come," said Mrs. Massingbyrd, waving us back.
"You'll know soon enough. Don't tell, Cecilia;" and she caught the
child by the arm and carried her along, as they made for the stable.
There was something preposterous in the air. I have known Felicia long
enough to recognize a certain irresponsible little laugh as a danger
signal. Presently the children came back, Mrs. Massingbyrd with Cecilia
still tucked under her wing.
"Yes, it's the strangest thing," she was chattering, "the impression I
produce on strangers! First they always call me _Miss_ Massingbyrd,
then, later, they always ask where Massingbyrd is! Not one person in a
thousand will believe I'm a real, bona-fide, dyed-in-the-wool widow!"
Cecilia's eyes were open wide. I could see in her attitude that she
didn't think it good taste to joke about being taken for a divorcee.
Nor did I, and I wondered what my friend was up to, for generally Mrs.
Massingbyrd adapts herself to her company with all the flexibility in
the world.
I followed them into the house, and I was in time to see as pretty a
little tableau as ever was presented on the stage.
Discovered on the piazza was Almington, and at sight of him my little
_ingenue_, Cecilia, hesitated, and was lost in a sea of blushes.
Mrs. Massingbyrd ran forward and greeted him gayly and gladly. Mamma's
training came to Cecilia's aid; she gathered herself together and,
in spite of burning cheeks and very bright eyes, advanced to meet
Almington in good order.
He greeted her pleasantly but indifferently, and turned eagerly to Mrs.
Massingbyrd.
"You're none the worse for your shipwreck, I hope," he asked.
"I never had a pleasanter day," Mrs. Massingbyrd assured him. "It's not
often I get a chance to display my only beauty free and unrebuked."
"Your pictures came out well," said Almington. "I couldn't wait for the
film to be through. I had it developed at once;" and he felt in his
pocket.
Mrs. Massingbyrd held out her rosy palm, then drew it back.
"No, not here," she decided. "Come down to the rose garden and show
them to me there. After all, they're just for you and me." And it was
with a self-satisfied air, the air of a conqueror, that Almington
unfolded his long legs and followed Mrs. Massingbyrd.
I looked at my companions. Cecilia's cheeks were still hot. I saw she
was a little bewildered, but she acted like a little thoroughbred, and
made pretty, perfunctory, young-girl talk with Felicia, whose face told
me nothing; and with Drake, who looked profoundly pleased.
Mrs. Massingbyrd and her cavalier were strolling up and down in the
rose garden at the foot of the terrace. Coquetry was in every movement
of her little blond head. Conquest was written large on Almington.
In pursuance of my own little policy, "There goes a lost man," I
remarked.
"He's been lost so often and won so often that it doesn't matter much,
does it?" said Felicia, lightly. "So if it's only he that's lost, we
won't have far to look for him."
"I thought Mrs. Mass. had turned him down," remarked Ellery Drake.
"It hasn't apparently prevented his turning up again," Felicia replied,
pertly.
I looked at Cecilia. Mamma's training held good; there was a visible
strain about her attitude, but she did her best to seem natural. It
was Cecilia's first time under fire, and she did her superior officers
credit. But there was that about the still babyish lines of her mouth
which showed me that she longed to be away by herself and have a good
cry. Drake couldn't stand it any longer.
"Come on, Cecilia, let us go for a walk, too," he suggested. And while
I blessed him for his kindness I thought the "too" unfortunate.
When they were out of earshot I turned severely to Felicia.
"I don't consider the Torture of the Innocents a pretty game," I told
her.
"Tell that to Lydia," was all I got out of my wife.
"I thought Cecilia's sister was a great friend of Lydia's," I asked.
"Exactly," Felicia assented, dryly.
"For a spotless child of heaven, Cecilia's playing the game pretty
well," I mused, as I watched her at dinner. During the hour of dressing
she had pulled herself wonderfully together. She held her little round
chin high in the air and devoted herself to Drake with all the aplomb
of a Felicia.
The cup of bitterness held its touch of sweet to her. Even if one must
suffer, one was out in the world, one was living, was what I read in
her attitude. But as I have said, I don't pretend to understand women;
still, I'm much mistaken if, during dinner, at least, she didn't have a
good time.
She ignored Almington as much as she could in a general conversation.
"Mrs. Massingbyrd can have you," her attitude seemed to say. "I fight
for no man."
I looked at Drake. If he wanted to keep his rose in the bud, he had
better carry her away quickly to a fresher atmosphere.
At the end of dinner the ladies exchanged nods and smiles. I saw that
an explanation was forthcoming for the mysterious visit to the stable.
They had been preparing what to me seemed not unlike a little amateur
Walpurgisnacht.
It was, of course, Lydia Massingbyrd's idea. Nobody else, not even
Felicia, could have been wrong-minded enough to want to slide downhill
in summer. My coachman's children have a species of roller sled on
which they daily endanger their lives by coasting down the steep
macadamized road which leads from my house.
"I saw them on my way from the station," proclaimed Mrs. Massingbyrd,
triumphantly; "and saw at once their possibilities."
"Will you steer me, Mr. Curtis?" asked Cecilia, turning her back on
Almington, and giving poor Drake a killing glance; and I thought
I surprised a glance of malicious intelligence pass between Mrs.
Massingbyrd and my wife.
Now, I know that, told in plain words the morning after, most of our
maddest fun seems flat and puerile enough. I know that a decent married
man of my age and a lady killer of Almington's ought to have poohpoohed
this childish sport, and sat with our cigars and our whiskies and sodas
on the piazza.
I suppose you think that's what you would have done. But I can tell
you, if you had dined with Felicia and Mrs. Massingbyrd, you'd have
been caught up in the fire of their folly. It's contagious, more
than anything I know. In the glamour of their lovely nonsense sliding
downhill on the coachman's children's roller sled would have seemed an
appropriate and delightful thing--or sliding down the banister or the
cellar door, if it had been their mad whim to do that.
Haven't you ever been a kid since you were grown up? Did all your
fooling stop before you were out of college? I'm sorry for you if it's
so. I hope, for my part, that Felicia and Mrs. Massingbyrd and their
like will make me forget my years for a long time to come. And I hope
often to wake up in the sober light of the next day wondering just what
magic it was that had turned back the hand of time for me, that I could
find merriment in sliding down a macadamized hill on a roller sled.
The night was cold, with a bit of a breeze; there was a moon, and the
glow from Felicia's gayety and Lydia Massingbyrd lasted my little
companion on our first swift, delirious slides.
It wasn't coasting, but it was exciting enough, as one went very fast.
And coming up we piled into a cart to be drawn up the hill. But after a
few slides the flame of my little friend's gayety flickered out, and as
the others were piling into the cart, "Let's walk," Cecilia suggested.
Youth is ever selfish in its distress, and what did Cecilia care
whether my legs were tired or not climbing that hill? Her little flock
of conventions had come fluttering back to her. Her doll was sawdust,
and there was a bad taste in her mouth.
Now, of course, you know that there's nothing more revolting than the
folly of others when you yourself are serious. Haven't you been annoyed
time and again by the senseless and meaningless good spirits of the
people next door? I'm sure you have. And just as often you've felt a
certain compassion for the people who give you sour looks and grim
glances when you're having the time of your life.
So it was with ever-increasing disapproval of my wife's merriment and
Mrs. Massingbyrd's abandon that Cecilia walked up the hill with me.
"I think," she confided to me, sadly, "I was born old!"
"There are some people who stay babies forever," I encouraged her.
"They are the fortunate ones," Cecilia said, gloomily. "I never have
been able to enjoy things long at a time. Even our good times at school
used to seem childish to me. And I thought when I came out and was
among grown people----"
"That things would be different," I supplemented. "And you find it's
just the same."
"Just the same," she agreed, in a gratified tone. "I feel as old as I
did at school!"
"Some people are born with a realization of the futility of pleasure,"
I went on, trying to voice Cecilia's mood.
"I suppose it's that," she sighed. "When I was at school I thought of
the world as a playground where I could amuse myself with the others."
"And instead, you find that you're only learning a different kind of
lesson, and play is as uninteresting as ever?"
"Yes, it's just like another kind of school, and the lessons harder to
learn--and of less use when you've learned them!" There was a pathetic
note in her voice.
"You're very different from other girls, Miss Bennett," I felt was an
appropriate and comforting thing to say.
"I know I am, and it's a great misfortune to be so," she acknowledged,
with becoming modesty.
"But it has its compensations."
"It's very lonely," she said. "No one has ever understood all I think
and feel. Mamma never has, nor the girls."
"And since you've been out?"
"Since I've been out I met some one--once"--the once threw the time of
meeting in the remote past--"some one I thought understood me--but I
was disappointed."
I murmured something sympathetic.
"Because I'm young in years people think I can't see things," she
cried, with a little rising temper.
"You have the best possible vantage, then, to observe the world as it
really is."
"And I do see things as they really are, and many things!" and she
clinched her little fists under cover of the darkness. Things were
getting somewhat strenuous for me, so I brought our conversational boat
to smoother waters.
"You make me think a little of Ellery Drake," I said. (Machiavelli
to the front!) "Because he seems so simple and direct; shallow
people don't take the trouble to understand him. But you've seen, of
course----"
"Yes," she assented; and I saw she was interested.
"What a lonely time he has of it, and under his apparent simplicity how
much depth there is."
"I've known him all my life--but I've never really known him--that is,
what _I_ call knowing a person." There was a great deal of intensity
in Cecilia's voice. "Ah, how hard it is to really know any--and so few
realize it." The atmosphere was getting a little rarefied, so I was
glad of the diversion caused by the two roller sleds whiffling by us.
"We're racing," called Mrs. Massingbyrd. "If we win, I'm to grant a
boon to Jack Almington."
"He'll probably ask her to take down her hair," said Machiavelli. "Men
always do."
"Oh, if that sort of thing amuses him"--contempt spoke in Cecilia's
tone--"let him have--his hank of hair!"
"There's a remarkably happy man," I said. "No still waters in his; a
perfectly delightful fellow, only spoiled by women!"
"Is he?" asked Cecilia, indifferently.
"He's been so immensely liked, you know, that what he really needs is a
snub. He thinks he's only to look at a woman for him to like her."
"Wouldn't one call that just a trifle conceited?" Cecilia's voice
dripped sarcasm.
"Not in his case," I returned, cruelly. "For, you see, it's generally
so. I've never known a more fatal man than Almington."
"He's not _always_ fatal," Cecilia gave out, dryly; and she shut her
little mouth with a firmness that even in the dim moonlight made
itself visible.
We stood at the top of the hill in silence for a moment, waiting for
the cart with the others in it. They came up laughing. How vain and
empty their laughter was, I was sure Cecilia was thinking. Her deep
knowledge of the world and its iniquity were fairly bowing down her
young shoulders.
The laughter and nonsense grew louder, and I descried, standing upright
in the cart, a vision, spirit or woman I couldn't tell.
My companion stared a moment and then remarked:
"_Mrs. Massingbyrd's hair has come down!_" Into these simple words was
packed all the quintessence of disapproval that Cecilia had learned
from her various advisers. There were echoes of her mother's shocked
tones, haunting accents of her offended teacher, all welded together by
the cool disapproval that was Cecilia's own.
I am sure that if my delightful little guest could have heard the
awful, the chilling, contempt of "Mrs. Massingbyrd's hair has come
down," she would have veiled her face with it in abject shame.
I gathered by her attitude and that of Felicia and Almington that
these silly creatures were playing at tableaux, the cart serving as a
_Mi-careme char_.
Mrs. Massingbyrd's hair, more miraculous than ever in the moonlight,
fell down to her knees. Her eyes looked seraphically heavenward.
Almington held her hand, kneeling before her, while Felicia, a little
shawl disposed as drapery about her, was pointing dramatically out into
the night, giving an admirable impersonation of those statuesque young
ladies who, in tableaux, have no _raison d'etre_ save to round out the
composition and look pretty.
Later I learned that the name of this impressive tableau was: "The
Triumph of Virtue."
At that moment I was too occupied with the attitude of my little
companion to pay attention to Mrs. Massingbyrd's foolery.
Cecilia had just caught sight of Almington as he knelt, holding the
hand of Virtue, his lean legs bent like the blade of a knife. Almington
generally cuts a fine figure, through a certain sense of the fitness of
things. His air of secret melancholy wins half his battles for him, and
he is one of those men who must at any cost hang on to the last shred
of dignity, as they are nothing without it. In his present situation I
have no hesitation in saying he looked fatuous and grotesque.
How he came to lend himself to the crazy whim of the two girls I can't
tell. I suppose he was carried away by the flood of their high spirits,
as many a wiser man has been before him and will be after him.
But if I had excuses for him, Cecilia had none.
It may be heartbreaking to have your first "serious young man" leave
you at the smiles of a pretty widow with blond hair; but, after all,
by showing how truly noble you are, you may some day crush your rival
and bring your suitor to your knees, crying, "Peccavi!" It's bad to
learn he's a heartbreaker, but, after all, then there's all the more
incentive to break his heart. You can, whatever happens, bear your
suffering nobly, and at the worst you have lots of things, heaps
simply, to tell the girls.
But to have your first hero of romance make himself ridiculous--that is
the end of all things. Sorrow has then no dignity. A broken heart for a
man like that is out of the question. Oh, it's a bitter thing to think
the drama of one's life a tragedy and have it turn out a low comedy!
Cecilia saw her hero exactly as he was, at that moment, stripped of all
adornment.
Glamour died, romance withered away; in the clear fire of her
uncompromising young scorn.
She was proving again that man's only unpardonable crime toward the
woman who loves him is to make himself ridiculous.
It was really quite a dramatic little moment. The late hero, now
turned mountebank, descended and helped out Felicia and Lydia, radiant
in her white and gold attire--and it was only then I saw Drake, who had
been sitting stiffly in the back of the cart.
_He_ had taken no part in the pageant. If his temper was impaired, his
dignity wasn't. Sliding downhill was all right, his rigidity seemed to
say, but no play acting in his. His mood and Cecilia's jumped together.
Her eyes met his. "I know you now," her grateful glance seemed to say.
Meantime Mrs. Massingbyrd, lovely as an angel, drifted along the white
road.
"It's breaking the rules of the game," Felicia said to her, "for you to
have taken down your hair."
"It fell down itself," answered Lydia the unashamed.
"But you looked so entirely lovely," my wife went on, "that I forgive
you. It's worth the price."
And I guiltily hoped that Mrs. Massingbyrd would refrain from saying,
"That's exactly what Bobby said."
She stood pensive a moment in the moonlight. Drake and Cecilia, drawn
together by the feeling of superiority they shared in common--and
which I had helped to point out--wandered off together. Almington was
absorbed in an open and impertinent admiration of Mrs. Massingbyrd's
beauty, and Felicia and I gazed at her, and again Felicia said,
approvingly: "It's an unfair advantage to take--but it's really worth
it!"
Then the dreamy look in lovely Mrs. Massingbyrd's eyes deepened, and
she opened her lovely lips and said:
"Felicia, I'm so desperately hungry that I wouldn't coast down that
hill again--not for anything! Did you say you had something good for
supper?"
"And at supper I shall ask my boon," Almington answered.
"Boon?" said Mrs. Massingbyrd, as she watched Cecilia and Drake vanish
together in the moonlight among the flowers. "Boon? You greedy person!
Isn't it boon enough to have seen me with my hair down by moonlight! I
wonder at your graspingness, Jack Almington!"
After we had said good-night to our guests, after Cecilia and Drake had
at last come in from an interminable talk on the piazza, after Mrs.
Massingbyrd had stuffed herself--in the face of her ethereal loveliness
I hate to use such a word, but I know no other; indeed, she applied
herself to supper with such a fair, frank and honest appetite that she
had neither eyes nor ears for Almington's compliments--after all this
was over, Felicia turned to me with a look of satisfaction.
"You played up nobly that time, Robert," she said. "I've never known
you to catch on so quickly and without a word from anyone."
I gained time with remarking, pathetically, "You've always underrated
my intelligence."
"I call it a thoroughly artistic performance," my wife said; "and the
beauty of it is that there was no talk, no nothing, but each one doing
his work."
I looked at Felicia, to see if by any chance she was making a pitfall
for me, but there was no danger signal. I thought it safe to give out,
"I'm glad you liked my little share in it."
"You were splendid," she cried, cordially. "And if Miss Bennett only
knew it, we deserve a vote of thanks from her."
"Yes, don't we?" I took care not to commit myself.
"It isn't as if we hadn't provided Cecilia with another suitor, and I'm
sure Ellery Drake, from any point of view, is far more desirable than
Almington."
"I should say he was," I cordially assented.
"And then, who can tell if Almington was really serious? And for a
young girl to be _affichee_ with Almington her first season is nothing
short of tarnishing," Felicia went on, virtuously.
"That's what I've said from the beginning," I put in.
"And you certainly played up nobly. We couldn't have put it through so
quickly without you," my wife was generous enough to confess. "But did
you ever see anything as splendid and self-sacrificing as Lydia?"
"Self-sacrificing?" I wondered, feeling my way.
"Why, she made herself odious--simply odious--in Cecilia's eyes, so
Cecilia would feel furious at having Almington like her." Sometimes
Felicia is anything but lucid.
"Like whom?" I naturally wanted to know.
"Like Lydia," replied my wife, impatiently. "A girl can stand anything
but having a man she likes fall in love with a woman she doesn't. It's
queer," she said, suspiciously, "clever as you are sometimes, how dense
you are others. _Did_ you understand----"
But at this late date I wasn't going to have my laurels snatched from
me. So I hastened to assure her. "Of course," I said, loftily, "I
understood Mrs. Massingbyrd intended to interfere!"
Scarlet her cloak, her lips all scarlet too,
Her cloudy hair as golden as the leaves
Of the sun-mellowed hickories, her voice
The rich, low whispers of the brooks that please
By hinting Autumn mysteries, her eyes
Witch-lights of laughter and of mad surprise.
Oh, gypsy prodigal, who gives and gives,
Till penury in winter strips you bare,
Cover me with the splendor of your locks,
Let your eyes challenge me from dull despair--
Wake me and sting me till I, too, shall sweep
Round in the revels that your whirlwinds keep.
_By_ MARIE VAN VORST
Gertrude Warrener was twenty-five years old on the day she went into
the back library and, seated in a rocking chair, a newspaper and a box
of candy-kitchen chocolates in her lap--began to live.
Hitherto the boundaries of her lifeline had been limited by a wooden
fence circling a few feet of coarse grass and two frame houses like her
own. To the rear, in the yard, four poles formed a square with peculiar
precision, and on washdays the level lines of a cord, stretching
cat's-cradle-wise, supported the household laundry.
She had taken for eight years the front rooms of the house for her
point of vantage, and when she had mentally stated "Mrs. Felter's just
gone into the Perches'," or "Pearl Exeter does her marketing in the
afternoons instead of the mornings," she had nothing further to say.
One day she caught herself in the middle of some such banal reflection,
and, going to the back of the house, took her place in the window of a
microscopic library.
Gertrude Warrener did not remotely dream that she on this day passed
the Rubicon lying between existence and life.
When the mind is sensible of inertia--the eyes catch sight of living
forms, and the soul yearns toward something which it has not--it may be
taken for granted that a life-breath has blown over the valley of dead
bones.
In the case of Gertrude Warrener, it was indeed a tomb in which she
awakened, and she did not know that she had been immured.
In her seventeenth year, George Warrener, just received into a
subordinate position in a New York banking and broking firm, began to
pay her his bashful attentions. With no spoken words on his part that
she could remember--nor could he for the life of him have recalled the
formula--there was an engagement. She married him before her eighteenth
birthday.
As she sat in the library, all image of the youthful lover was
completely effaced from her mind. He was now like hundreds and dozens
of other middle-rank business men. Of medium height, stocky, his hair
and short, stubby mustache nondescript, his eyes blue, wide apart and
rather small, he was a successful type and entirely sacrificed as an
individual. He often said:
"I look like a prosperous Wall Street man, and that is as near as I
shall ever come to it--to look like it."
But in spite of his dapper appearance, Warrener was an overworked
drudge. He worked so hard and so long, his daily trips on unhealthy
ferries and hot cars sapped his vitality to such an extent, that all
his life had been spent and lived by the time he crossed at night the
threshold of his home.
Gertrude in the little library opened the pages of the _Slocum Daily_
slowly. She read the town gossip, a local weather prediction, an
account of the hospital fair; and as she rocked and ate one after the
other the chocolate marshmallows she had a feeling of freedom, whose
cause was due simply to the fact that she had changed her point of
view--due to the humble novelty of her transposition.
George's library smelled of stale tobacco. She had sensitive nostrils,
and was beginning to find the dead odor unpleasant, when at this point
she fell upon an item in the _Slocum Daily_ which held her attention:
We are glad to learn that the McAllister homestead has been opened.
After the long absence in Europe of the family, Mr. and Mrs.
Bellamy have returned, and Slocum welcomes them back with much
pleasure.
"Slocum!" She spoke aloud, and there was scorn in her tone. "Well,
I guess they'll laugh at that. I don't believe _they_ care for the
_Daily_!"
Old Mrs. McAllister at once took form for her. She had come to their
wedding, and Gertrude remembered her as tall, and that her dress
and hat became her. The young, light-minded bride had remarked the
difference between this guest and other Slocumites.
Kept in state on the buffet downstairs was a silver pitcher, the sole
real silver in the house. Mrs. McAllister had sent it to the Warreners
as a wedding present.
Gertrude got up and went out in the hall. "Eliza!"
"Yes, ma'am." The maid of all work appeared at the foot of the back
stairs.
"Say--just go and get that silver pitcher off the dining-room buffet
and clean it. I guess it hasn't been cleaned for three years."
The maid looked at her in astonishment. "Why, we haven't got a mite of
cleaning powder in the house, Mrs. Warrener!"
Mrs. Warrener came slowly down the stairs herself, and, going to the
dining-room buffet, looked at her wedding gift--or what she could see
of it through a thick layer of dirt and discoloration. Then she carried
it to the bathroom, and, with nail brush and tooth powder, shone it up
as well as she could. It was a tribute of welcome to the return of the
Bellamys.
After a week or so of the new atmosphere of the tiny library she summed
up her life as follows, and was able to state that the routine of her
days never varied: She rose at seven and dressed. George's train went
at eight, and she sat with him at table through a breakfast of hot
bread, meat, potatoes and coffee. Then her husband put on his coat
and hat and took his leave without even bidding her good-by. She felt
lonely when the butcher and the grocer had gone. When she had given her
directions to Eliza, it was never more than ten o'clock. In days past
she had been used to walk out to the library and get a book, or wander
into a neighbor's "and sit a while," but of late there commenced from
the early morning a period of rocking and reading in the library. In
the evening George returned from New York only in time to come to the
table without the formality of washing his hands.
These were her interests. Too timid to go to Town Club meetings, too
simple-minded to be of any great importance in the different Slocum
circles, she kept to herself. Her sole interest would naturally be her
husband; him she saw from seven P. M. to seven A. M.; or, rather, she
slept beside him during these hours--for directly after dinner he would
throw himself down on the lounge in his library and smoke and read till
at nine o'clock she roused him and sent him to bed in their common
bedroom, in their common bed.
George, tired and devitalized by his strenuous life, absorbed by his
own and his employer's affairs, fell asleep at once. But his companion,
more alive than she knew, would lie awake until long past midnight, her
body unfatigued, her mind restless, her wakeful eyes staring into the
dark which had for her no emotion and no mystery.
One afternoon she found she had read through a whole book without
stopping, and for the first time in her life had been absorbed. She got
up and turned off the steam heat and opened the window.
"It must be ninety here with these radiators! You either freeze or
stew."
The air came in bluffly, its unfriendly edges met her cheeks; before
they could be refreshed she was cold in her thin muslin shirt-waist.
She had risen in expression of a sudden need of air, a sudden sense of
suffocation, but she thought only that she was "nervous," and would
go out and take a walk. A little later, a golf cape over a short
coat of material known as "covert"--short-skirted, a gray felt hat on
her head--Mrs. George Warrener was seen by her neighbors to be going
"uptown."
Not until she had left the village, keeping steady pace up the hill
toward the Golf Club, did she feel that she had "let off steam." The
quick motion set free the tension of her nerves, and she almost forgot
the acute sensation that drove her from the house. At the golf links
she approached the course and stood by the fence, near to one of the
last bunkers.
The field was sparsely dotted with the golfers. A red dash in the
distance, a green dash, indicated the players who bent in bright
sweaters over their sticks. Two men came across the ground close to
her--strangers--she saw that instantly, and regarded them with the
curiosity of a resident. The man who was playing, his club swung over
his shoulder, his driver in his hand, was short and stout, with smooth,
red cheeks and bright eyes under shaggy brows. His shoes were large and
heavy, his golf stockings thick, and his fustian clothes rough and well
made. His companion, a younger man in a loose-sleeved overcoat, had a
soft felt hat on his head and a lighted cigar in his hand. The older
man said to him, laughing:
"There you are, old man! If you're really caddying for me, you'll have
to ferret the ball out of that ditch by the fence. I saw it roll down."
The other lazily nodded, took a puff at his cigar and came over in the
direction indicated. Mrs. Warrener leaned on the fence watching the
gentleman, who poked about in the grass with his cane.
"Let me give you a fresh ball out of my pocket; I've got three left,"
he called.
The older man laughed. "Oh, go on, look for it; it's right under your
nose. You've given me a 'fresh ball out of your pocket' every time one
has rolled fifteen yards!"
Mrs. Warrener stooped down; she saw the golf ball on the other side of
the fence. She put her hand under through the railing and picked it up;
she handed it to the gentleman.
"I think this is your ball."
He took it with a swift, quick look at her, lifted his hat with cane
and cigar in the same hand and thanked her. Taking the ball, he
returned to his friend.
Mrs. Warrener watched the older gentleman prepare to drive--then the
two men follow the direction indicated by the sharp, momentary flight
of the little white ball, the golfer tripping briskly along, the other
dark figure following slowly. She had never seen either of them before;
who were they? The distant rattle of an incoming train--the one before
her husband's--warned her of the time. She would barely reach home
before George came in. "Although," she reflected, "I may just as well
be late, for all _he_ will notice, he is so tired, anyway."
She walked, nevertheless, mechanically toward home, so slowly that when
she reached the village street George's train had been in some time.
At this time of night a little crowd was gathered, as a rule, for the
trolley, and Mrs. Warrener decided to take the car and anticipate her
husband's arrival by several minutes.
While she stood with the others who waited, the strangers of the Golf
Club joined the crowd. As the car appeared the gentleman in the black
coat helped her in and sat opposite her. When he threw back his coat
to get out his fare from his pocket, she observed that he wore a gray
waistcoat of soft material--it looked as though it were "knit," she
thought, or "worked"--a bright red tie and--unusual elegance among the
men of Slocum--gloves--gray gloves, as soft in color as his waistcoat.
Very much struck by his dress, she ventured, with a certain timidity,
to look him in the face. The vivid color of his cravat made him seem
very dark; all she could observe was a dark face, dark mustache and
eyes, for he was looking at her, and she met his eyes directly. Their
interested curiosity rendered her uncomfortable, and she removed her
glance, which traveled down the line of colorless passengers, tired men
in dusty, careless dress; unbrushed derbys, linen far from immaculate,
gloveless hands. Each man had his bunch of evening papers, some carried
parcels from the city for suburban use. A woman she knew, an inveterate
shopper, nodded brightly to her.
"Been in New York all day. Just too tired. Never saw such a crowd in
the stores; why, I thought I never _would_ get waited on. Say----"
There was a vacant seat by Mrs. Warrener, and the lady came over and
took it, continuing a description of bargains, and a tirade against
crowds. "Been up this week, Gert?"
"No, I hardly ever go in."
"Well, it's a change, but I always say when we get to Slocum I'm glad I
don't live in New York, it's so wearing. Been up to the Golf Club?"
"Yes, but not to play."
The conversationalist was conscious of a change in her well-known
neighbor's tone, an accent, just what it was she could not imagine, but
it was sufficiently marked to give her food for thought.
As Mrs. Warrener left the car at her corner, Mrs. Turnbull puzzled over
her. Perhaps she was offended with her? But she had no reason for such
an idea! Perhaps George Warrener was losing money? As money to the
unsentimental, commercial American mind is the source of all bliss and
the cause of all unhappiness, the slide down which all spirits fall and
the height to which they rise, she reached a sad conclusion in this,
and dropped her wonderings.
Warrener and his wife arrived at the same moment on the steps of their
two-story frame house.
"Well!" he said. He took out his latchkey and entered the door. The
hall was hot and full of the smell of roasting meat and soup herbs. The
dinner puffed out to meet the diners with damp, pungent warmth. George
put his batch of papers down on the hall stand.
"Well," he repeated, absently, took off his dusty derby, hung it up and
got out of his overcoat.
He looked for no response to his greeting. Mrs. Warrener understood
this, and made none.
Warrener went upstairs to his study.
"Gracious, Gert, some one's left the window open in my den! It's like
ice here!"
"It'll get hot enough. Turn on the steam."
Mrs. Warrener followed her husband upstairs into the cold little room.
The smell of stale smoke seemed to have frozen on the air, but over
it the smell of the cigar the gentleman had smoked, a peculiar aroma,
as new to her, as delicious, as would have been a priceless perfume,
came to her nostrils. She went to her chair where she had sat for hours
reading, and picked up her book, which she kept in her hand.
"What have you been doing all day, Gert?" he asked at dinner, after he
had eaten his tepid soup and drunk an entire glass of ice water.
"Oh, I don't know--nothing much."
"Nothin' doin'? Well, you are in luck! I feel as if something was doin'
in every inch of my body. I'm tired out. Harkweather kept the clerks
down to-night--they won't get out before nine o'clock; but I said 'not
tonight for me. I'm goin' home.' And I'm goin' right to bed. I guess
I'll sleep twelve hours, all right!"
As they went upstairs, he first and she slowly following, she suggested:
"How would you like me to sleep in the spare room, if you're so tired?"
"Why?" he asked, jocularly. "Do I snore so?"
"Yes, but that's not it. It may feel good to have the whole bed to
yourself."
"Well, I believe it would."
In the spare room, close to the springs, on a narrow, single bed, Mrs.
Warrener crept alone. She drew the adjusting electric light close to
her and took her book up again to re-read, her elbow in the pillow and
her cheek on her hand. She followed the printed lines with dawning
interest on her face, and a growing intelligence, until all of a
sudden the dead stillness of the hour and time struck her. The fireless
room--for there was no steam heat in it--gave her a chill. She put out
the light and drew the coverlet about her and settled down to sleep.
The business interest of which George Warrener formed a humble part
had no picturesque traditions. Like everything else in New York, the
corporation had even during Warrener's time boasted several different
addresses. When especial advantages presented themselves in the shape
of higher buildings and higher rent, Harkweather & Fulsome moved. The
unstableness, the constant transition, had an effect upon him which he
did not appreciate. Warrener, with his firm, was restless; and restless
with his eighty million fellow Americans.
Harkweather & Fulsome's last move had been to a twenty-two-floored
steel structure, from whose tenth story were visible the roofs of the
buildings not yet razed to make room for other giant office honeycombs.
Money, at Harkweather & Fulsome's, superseded everything else in the
world, extinguished the lights of pleasure, destroyed even the capacity
to enjoy. Everything else was crowded out of the question. Harkweather
& Fulsome were "strictly business," strictly getters of wealth; and
they squeezed dry every sponge that came to their hands.
Warrener, in the office, had drifted into the position of confidential
clerk, very much used when wanted, and shifted off into a little,
stuffy room, where he had a desk and typewriter, when his services were
not in active demand. Here he copied, filed and noted; added, opened
and docketed mail; and read the financial news in every available
sheet in the city. To his own thinking, he was an authority on stocks
and bonds. He heard innumerable tips thrown out; saw them acted upon,
and prove either valuable or worthless; followed the rise and fall of
fortunes near and far; assisted at failures and successes; and during
the hours of his routine in the office had the sensation of being
himself a millionaire! But when he left the ferry, the bondholders and
"big men" hurried to their more important trains and more important
stations, and Warrener hustled himself, with his evening papers,
into the short train of the Slocum local, he then distinctly felt
the difference between his bank balance and his chief's! He lived in
the atmosphere of money, but he had never been ambitious. Of average
intelligence, common school education, steady-going and trustworthy, he
had no intentions further than to pay his bills, earn his salary and
keep at the business.
Were he asked what part of his life he recalled with most pleasure
he would have unhesitatingly answered: "Getting engaged and going
on our honeymoon." The sentimental period--which had come into his
unimaginative life with the imperiousness of that passion which at
least once during a man's life changes his existence for a time, short
or long--had for Warrener left behind it a memory which the cares of
the world, the moth and rust of vulgar routine, trains and ferries,
quick lunches and elevators, common surroundings and abasing ideals,
overlaid but never destroyed.
Eight years before he had asked the prettiest girl he knew to marry
him, and she had said yes. His vacation falling at this time, they had
spent two weeks in August at Far Rockaway, and from there went directly
into the rented house on Grand Street, and the newly married man began
his bi-daily pilgrimages on the train.
He would have been ashamed to have anyone, above all his wife, know
that as he crossed the ferry, one of a thick-packed crowd on the front
part of the boat, standing there close to the running waters, near the
bow, he often gave himself a mental holiday; then the image of Gertrude
in a pinkish dress and picture hat came to his mind as he had seen her
on the boardwalk at Rockaway eight years ago. It was a species of revel
for him to recall those days. He was not unhappy or even discontented;
he was too commonplace to be capable of either sensation. He was
numbed, pinched hard by life.
"I am indispensable to Mr. Harkweather," he repeated, with pride, and
passed the time with his hand on other people's grindstones, all the
gold dust flying into other people's bags.
One especial Sunday he awakened after a refreshing sleep, stretched his
arms and yawned aloud, then lay pleasantly conscious of the well-being
of his condition--half asleep still, and it was far into the morning!
Belowstairs he could hear the heavy footsteps of Eliza, and fancied the
early presage of dinner. Warrener listened, knowing he should soon hear
another footstep lighter than that of the maid-of-all-work.
"Gert!"
Mrs. Warrener came in.
"It's twelve o'clock," she said, "and you'll just about have time to
get up, take your bath and dress for dinner."
"All right," he responded, cheerfully, but did not move. Instead,
putting his hands up behind his head, he watched his wife as she
fetched out his clean clothes and laid them with his Sunday suit over
a chair. As she moved quietly about the room, the man's feeling of
content grew, added to by the feminine presence and the evidence of
care and wifely attention. The little room was bright with the sunshine
of a mild November day. The chromos, the glaring wall paper, the
cheap oak bedroom set, the thin lace curtains touched with the light,
appeared lovely in their master's eyes. Before him was the prospect of
a long day of repose, spent in perfect, tranquil laziness, a day in
the fresh country air. There would be no office or telegraph calls,
no duties, no sounds to disturb the hard-earned hours. His relaxed
nerves and body rejoiced in the holiday. He was as happy as he could
ever be--did he know it, would ever be. Years afterward Warrener looked
back at that especial Sunday with something of the same affection he
bestowed upon his marriage memories, and with keener regret.
As Mrs. Warrener went out of the room, he called her:
"Say, Gert!"
She paused at the door, clean towels in her hand. She was going to get
his bath ready.
"Well, what?"
He wanted to call: "Give me a kiss." But her manner rather distanced
him. So he said: "What'll you give me if I guess what we're going to
have for dinner?"
"Nothing," she laughed. "I should think anybody with a nose would know.
Eliza leaves the kitchen door open all the time."
"It smells good," he sniffed. "And it's away ahead of sandwiches and a
glass of beer; that's my noon meal, as a rule."
She warned him he wouldn't get any dinner at all if he didn't hurry
up, and in a few moments he heard the running of his bath; the sound,
to his good humor and contented frame of mind, was one more pleasant,
luxurious, agreeable part of the day.
Later, shaved and washed, dressed with great precision and care, he sat
in the parlor, the multitudinous sheets of the New York daily papers
around him.
Gertrude rocked idly in the window, her eyes on the deserted street.
Eliza washed the dinner dishes and put them rattling away, then tramped
up the front stairs, and in gorgeous magnificence went out the back
way, emerging into Grand Street. At the sight of her Mrs. Warrener
said: "I'm going to give you a cold supper, George, some salad and
tea--she's made biscuits, I guess."
"Oh, that's all right. It seems as if we only just got up from dinner."
He threw his paper down. "Want to take a walk, Gert? It's nice out, and
I don't think it's cold."
"Well," she said, indifferently, "I'll get my hat and coat."
When she came down Warrener had been walking about his tiny parlor and
dining room, and was still under the spell of householder and in love
with his possessions.
"You've got the McAllister wedding present cleaned up fine."
"It's the only real silver we've got; it makes the other things look
common."
Mrs. Warrener regarded the display on her buffet with some discontent.
"Oh, I don't know," returned the husband. "It's as good as you can get
anywhere for the money."
"The McAllisters have come back to Slocum," his wife mentioned.
"Yes," he nodded. "Mrs. McAllister used to go to Uncle Samson's church.
I don't see why you shouldn't go up there to call some day."
Mrs. Warrener had opened the front door and gone out on the stoop;
George, getting into his overcoat, followed her. Side by side they went
slowly down the front steps of the little wooden stoop.
"I shouldn't know what to say."
"Oh, she'll say it all; besides, perhaps she'll be out--leave a
card--got one of mine?"
"Yes, I guess so."
"Well."
As they turned into Grand Street and hesitated a moment as to their
direction, Warrener suggested:
"Might as well walk along up toward the McAllister place; it's as good
a walk as any."
As they started off in the fresh, crisp air, refreshing and sweet
to the man's nostrils, stimulating and revivifying after his close
confined days, a sudden impulse to have the woman by his side nearer
him overcame him; he drew her arm through his.
"Let's walk arm in arm, like old married couples."
But Mrs. Warrener held back and took her arm away.
"No," she demurred; "I think it's common."
In the following days Mrs. Warrener took up her life, or, more
accurately, began it, standing on the threshold of an abyss--the
flight of steps before her that led to the new. As she had never been
particularly interested in anything, she did not know that she was
an invalid with a fatal malady, a malady whose term is too commonly
employed by people whose reason for the state is less apparent than
this woman's in a country town. She had never heard the word "boredom"
used.
There were half a dozen village friends of Mrs. Warrener's whose status
was on a higher plane than hers, whose houses had more square feet of
land around them, whose "help" was more efficient. In their parlors now
and then she took an inadequate hand at euchre, and of late she had
been trying to learn bridge. These ladies made the town library and the
little hospital, the Children's Home and the church interests, run more
or less smoothly; they had a hundred busy, useful interests. They were
good wives and good mothers and good citizens. She had never heard any
of them use the verb "to be bored," and if she had, she would not have
known what it meant! She suffered under a complaint which, like many
maladies, is less fatal so long as it has no name; but the disease was
too acute to be ignored. It had engendered too many complications.
At the town library the librarian from among the rows of school books
one day handed down to Mrs. Warrener a French dictionary. From the
novel she had read a few days before she had copied out this phrase:
_Ennui_ is like the unseen worm in the wood, that slowly gnaws the
good, clean substance until his parasite presence is declared by
innumerable interstices that finally destroy the wood and proclaim
it rotten to the fiber--_ennui_ had eaten into her, devoured her.
There was not one inch of her that did not ache from desuetude,
from moral inertia.
Gertrude found the word "_ennui_" in the dictionary, and the following
definition: "Listlessness, languor, tedium, lassitude, tiresomeness,"
compared it with her scrap of paper, puzzled her pretty brows until
their lines looked like pain. As she put up the book and left the
library, she said to herself: "Well, I guess that's what's the matter
with me."
When Slocum was scarcely a village Edward McAllister, after his
retirement from the Supreme Court, purchased sufficient land in the
State to establish a model farm. Here his children, Paul and Agnes,
were born, and before they had time to know they were Americans
McAllister accepted a foreign embassy and lived with his family abroad
until his death. His daughter, Agnes, had married in Rome, and after a
few years of wandering and continental life, with her husband, Mr. John
Bellamy, and her brother, Mr. Paul McAllister, she returned to Slocum.
They had come back in order that Mrs. Bellamy should see just how much
she could stand of American life and manners; in order that their
children might have enough of their native soil on their hands as they
played, and enough of its education in their heads, to entitle them to
the self-sufficiency of American citizens.
Little Bellamy was immured in Groton, hard at the American part of
it, and Mrs. Bellamy sat this morning in a charming room furnished in
Colonial style: continental taste and the accessories that make living
a luxury and pleasure combined to make her a charming environment. Mrs.
Bellamy was teaching her little daughter the gentle art of making a
long rope of useless wool by means of a spool and a row of pins.
The mother's head bent close to the little girl's was as golden as the
child's. Her hands, with their flashing rings, played in and out among
the pins with a skill nothing short of miraculous in the eyes of the
little girl, who took up the spool between her own tiny fingers, the
worsted twisted hard around her thumb.
By the table, in a luxurious leather chair, the other occupant of the
room was almost lost to sight. His presence was, however, indicated by
the film of cigarette smoke that rose curlingly around his head. The
yellow cover of a French novel was just visible above the table.
"Paul," his sister asked him, "how do you like America?"
"_America?_" he repeated, and, although he said no more, she knew by
his quizzical drawl what he meant.
"Well, Slocum, then, and the old place?"
"Immensely!"
"Absurd," she laughed. "You have only been here a week, and except for
ridiculously caddying a couple of times for John at the Golf Club, you
have not been out of the house."
"In which case, how could I fail to like it?" he said, with mock
politeness. "You've kept me company! _You_ don't seem to be tempted to
explore the old scenes any more than I do! Perhaps, like me, you're
afraid of the shock. You know how luxurious I am. If it were not for
the extremely swell gentleman and lady servants, I should feel very
much at ease." He had not put down his book; he still smoked and
appeared to be reading what he said from it. "I was most amused the
other day as I stood on the piazza; did John tell you? I saw going
around the road two very attractive-looking girls--they recalled
the Gibson pictures as much as anything else. They wore, of course,
short skirts and those bodices that you see everywhere. They had a
bicycle, each of them, and they were walking along, their arms around
each other's waists. I said to John: 'By Jove, what a stunning pair
of girls! I should like to know them.' And he said: 'They are living
in the same house with you, my dear fellow--_they are my cook and my
laundress_.'"
Mrs. Bellamy laughed appreciatively. "Tell me, Paul, how _does_ America
strike you?"
McAllister reluctantly laid his book down, crossed his legs and
prepared to answer.
"I've been out more often than you think. I took a turtle view of the
town; I mean I sauntered up and down it and out of it, and it gave me
as complete a sensation as I have had in twenty-four years. A better
sensation, _ma chere_, and I am not likely to have another."
Mrs. Bellamy listened, as she always did when her brother gave himself
the trouble to speak more than one sentence at a time to any woman with
whom he was not in love.
"It is all new-born, honorable, progressive and decent. Everybody seems
to have a certain disdain for me. I believe it is because, if you will
permit me to say so, I dress so well."
His sister laughed.
"Not that _they_ do not dress well! They do--astoundingly well; but
they all dress alike, and you cannot tell, as in the case of your own
servant, a lady from her cook, or a butcher boy on a holiday from the
millionaire's son, if he happens to come through town on foot or in a
motor. Let's agree, then, that I do look different. 'The drug-store
man'--that's what you call him, isn't it?--looked at me as if he hated
me and my clothes when he gave me some calisaya. He thought I was a
foreigner; they don't like foreigners. If anything could put me on the
same footing with my country people, this town street did, as far as it
was able. By the time I got to the grocery I had forgotten that I had
not seen America for thirty years, and that I was so different. Nothing
remained but that _country school feeling_, that boy feeling. If you
ask what I mean: There was a barrel of apples outside of the grocer's
door. I wanted to sneak one! I would have given fifty dollars for a
glass of cider--for anything, in short, to keep up the game. I went in
and asked him if he had such a thing as 'sarsaparilla.' He had it, and,
in spite of my 'difference,' he pulled his cork and I drank the whole
glass of that stuff. Pah! don't ask me about it! It was all right, I
don't doubt; but when I left the corner and started up the hill, that
wonderful sentimental feeling had entirely left me! There was only a
wretched nausea--a complete sense of how far away I had gone from the
simplicity of the whole thing, and I don't say that I congratulated
myself. Now, will you let me read, Agnes?"
But Mrs. Bellamy had turned to a servant who entered with a card--with
two cards. "'Mr. and Mrs. Warrener,'" she read aloud. "Oh, dear me,
have you let them in?"
It appeared there was only a lady: "Mrs. George Warrener."
"Heavens! I suppose that a lot of these people will call, and I must
be more or less civil. Show Mrs. Warrener in--there is time to escape
for you, Paul, by way of the dining room."