Project.)
"I never gaze
Upon the evening, but a tide of awe,
And love, and wonder, from the Infinite,
Swells up within me, as the running brine
From the smooth-glistening, wide-heaving sea,
Grows in the creeks and channels of a stream,
Until it threats its, banks. It is not joy,--
'Tis sadness more divine."
Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1854, by
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the
District of Massachusetts.
Stereotyped by
New England Type and Stereotype Foundery,
_To the_
_With the fond Hope_
_This simple Volume_
Transcriber's Note:
There are two instances of illegible words in this text, both as
When the sun has disappeared behind the western mountains, and the stars
sparkled o'er the blue concave, we have been accustomed to sit down to
the compilation of this unpretending volume, and therefore it is called
"Eventide." O, that its pages might be read at that calm, silent
hour,--their follies mercifully overlooked, their faults as kindly
forgiven.
Fain would we dedicate this "waif of weary moments" to some warm-hearted,
watchful spirit, who might shelter it from the pitiless assaults of the
wide, wide world. But will not our simple booklet prove too insignificant
a mark for the critic's arrows?
In the language of another, we confidently say, melancholy is indifferent
to criticism.
Thus,
"In our own weakness shielded,"
O, Reading Public, we steal upon you 'mid the falling shadows, and lay
"Eventide" at your feet.
"The stars are out, and by their glistening light,
I fain would whisper in thine ear a tale;
Wilt hear it kindly? and if long and dull
Believe me far more deeply grieved than thou."
Clear and loud on the hushed silence of the midnight hour rang the chimes
of the village clock, from the tall steeple-tower of the quaint old
church of Wimbledon, while several ambitious chickens rose from their
neighboring perches, piped a shrill answering salute, and sank to their
nocturnal slumbers again. But nor clock nor chanticleer disturbed
Wimbledon. Still she slept on beneath the blossoming stars; and by their
soft, inspiring light, with your permission, gentle reader, we'll enter
the sleeping village.
Dim gleams of snowy cottages, peeping through a wealth of embowering
vines, steal on our star-lighted vision as we roam along the grassy
streets, and we scent the breath of gardens odorous with the sweets of
dew-watered flowers. Above and around we hear the musical stir of the
night wind among boughs and branches of luxuriant foliage, while ever and
anon it comes from afar with a deep-toned, solemn murmur, as though it
swept o'er forests of cedar and mournfully-echoing pine. Still roaming
on, the low rippling of flowing waters comes soothingly to our ears, and
we pause on the bank of a flower-bordered river that goes sweetly singing
on its way to the distant ocean. A tiny sailboat lies in a sheltering
cove, rocked gently to and fro by the swaying current. On a hill beyond
the stream we mark a large white-belfried building, relieved against a
dark background of wide-stretching timber-land. And turning our delighted
footsteps down an avenue of lofty cedar and linden trees, there rises at
length before our vision a splendid mansion, built after a most beautiful
style of architecture, with deep, bay windows, long corridors and
vine-covered terraces. Magnificent gardens, displaying the perfection of
taste, lay sloping to the southward. On the east the silvery river was
seen glancing through the shrubbery that adorned its banks. To the west
lay a beautiful park and pleasure ground, while far away to the northward
stretched the deep, dense forest, tall, dark and sombre.
And over all this lovely scene the stars shed their mild, ethereal light.
O, Wimbledon! art thou not beautiful 'neath their soft, silver gleams?
And doth not shadowy-vested romance roam thy grassy paths and
flower-strewn ways to-night, and with her wild, mysterious eyes gloating
on thy entrancing scenery, doth she not resolve to dwell awhile, 'mid thy
embowering vines, thy dewy-petalled flowers, mournfully-musical
cedar-groves, and web a fiction from the thousand tangled threads which
complicate and ramify thy social life?
We shall see what we shall see in Wimbledon; for gray dawn is already
breaking in the dappled east, and a man, closely buttoned to the chin in
a gray overcoat, emerges from a large brick mansion on the outskirts of
the village, and directs his steps toward an old, black, rickety-looking
house, which stands just on the bank of the river, surrounded by a
tangled growth of brush-wood.
Here the gairish day at length disclosed what the modest night had
obscured with her diamond veil of stars. Squalid poverty glared through
the broken window-panes, and want seemed clattering her doleful song on
the flying clapboards and crazy casements. A feeble, struggling light
from within showed the inmates were stirring as the man in the overcoat
gave a loud, careless thump on the trembling door, which was opened by a
pale, gaunt-looking urchin, clad in garments bearing patches of divers
hues.
"Is your mother at home, Bill?" inquired the man, gruffly.
"Yes, sir," answered the boy in a meek tone; "will you please to walk in,
Mr. Pimble?"
"No; tell her I want her to come and wash for me to-day," said the man,
in a harsh, rough voice, as he turned away.
The boy bowed and reentered the miserable apartment, where a few soggy
chips smoked on a bed of embers that were gathered in the corner of a
huge fire-place. A woman, with a begrimed cotton handkerchief tied over
her head, sat on the hearth endeavoring to blow them into a blaze, while
the smoke, that poured down the foul and blackened chimney, caused the
tears to roll from her eyes, and baffled her efforts.
"Never mind the fire, mother," said the lad, approaching; "I'll try and
pick up some dry sticks in course of the day to have the room warm when
you come home to-night. Mr. Pimble has just called, and wants you to go
and wash for him to-day."
"He won't pay me a cent if I go," answered the woman moodily; "all my
drudgery for that family goes to pay the rent of this miserable old
shell."
"I think he will give you something to-day, mother, if you tell him how
needy we are," suggested the boy.
"Never a cent," said the woman, with a gloomy shake of her head;
"however, I may as well go. I shall get a cup of tea and bit of dinner,
and I'll look out to bring you a cake, Willie."
"O, will you, mother?" exclaimed the boy, his wan features brightening
momentarily at the prospect of a single cake to appease the gnawings of
hunger.
The woman threw a coarse, threadbare blanket over her shoulders and went
forth, while the boy bent his way along the riverbank in search of dry
twigs and branches with which to replenish their wasted stock of fuel.
And he thought, as he picked up here and there the scanty sticks and laid
them in small bundles, of some lines of poetry he read on a bit of
newspaper that blew across his path one day:
"If joy and pain in this nether world,
Must fairly balanced be,
O, why not some of the _pain_ to them.
And some of the _joy_ to me?"
And he could not settle the point in his youthful mind. He could not
tell why David Pimble should go to school the year round at the great,
white seminary on the hill, while he could only go about two months in
the cold, biting winter to a town-school a mile distant. He could not
tell why said David should have warm woollen jackets, while his were
threadbare and patched with rags; nor why David should fare sumptuously
on buttered toast and smoking muffins, while he starved on the crusts
that were cast from his well-spread table.
All these were knotty points which poor little Willie Danforth was too
young and untaught to solve. When he should be older and wiser, would he
be able to solve them? He didn't know;--he hoped so; though he feared he
never would be much wiser than now, if he was always to remain so poor,
and be debarred from the privilege of attending school.
There's one school whose doors are and have ever been open wide for
Willie--the school of poverty and experience. Lessons swift and bitter
are indelibly impressed on the minds of the pupils there.
Thoughtful and abstracted, Willie wandered along, gathering his little
bundles of firewood, till he found himself at the foot of the hill on
which stood the great, white seminary where David Pimble, his brother and
sister, went to school month after month and year after year. He heard
voices, and, looking up, beheld the little group that were occupying his
thoughts, on the hill-top, laughing and mocking at him as he toiled along
with his bundles of sticks. His cheeks glowed with anger for a moment,
and then grew ashy pale, as he plodded on toward his miserable home.
Dilly Danforth, the poor washerwoman, had seen better days; but the
drunken dissipation of a husband, who was now in his grave, had reduced
her to abject, despairing poverty. Her unfortunate marriage and
persistence in clinging to the man of her choice, and enduring all his
abuses, excited the displeasure of her family, and they cast her from
them to suffer and struggle on as best she might. She knew not as she had
a relative in the world. She surely had no friend, save Willie, her
little boy, with whom she dwelt in the comfortless abode we have briefly
visited.
Alas for the suffering poor! How prone are the wealthy, by warm, glowing
grates, to forget their cheerless habitations, and turn inhumanly from
their pitiful tales of want and destitution!
"This work-day world, this work-day world,
How it doth plod along!"
Tap, tap, tap, on the back kitchen door of Esq. Pimble's great brick
mansion, and a clattering of plates and tea things within which quite
drowned the timid knock. A second and louder one brought a fat, red-faced
woman with rolled-up sleeves and a dish-towel in hand, to answer the
summons.
"Sakes, Dilly Danforth!" exclaimed she, on beholding the well-known,
faded blanket of the washerwoman; "what brings you here so airly in the
mornin'? If you are after cold victuals, I can tell you you can't have
any, for mistress--"
"I am not come seeking charity," said Dilly, cutting short the woman's
brawling speech; "Mr. Pimble wished me to come and wash for him to day."
"_He_ did?" said the bold-visaged housekeeper, opening her large,
buttermilk-colored eyes with astonishment; "well, for sure!"--and here
she seemed debating some matter in her mind for several moments, her hand
still holding the door in forbidding proximity to poor Mrs. Danforth's
pale, grief-worn face.
"Well, you can come in then, I s'pose," she said, at length, flinging it
open spitefully, and returning to the wiping of her breakfast dishes,
which she sent together with such a crash, that poor Dilly, as she stood
over the stove trying to warm her chilly fingers by a decaying fire,
momentarily expected to see them scattered over the floor in a thousand
fragments.
"Sakes! are you cold this warm spring morning?" snarled the plump,
well-fed housekeeper, as she thumped back and forth, carrying her piles
of plates to the cupboard. "Why don't you shut the outside door after
you, then? For my part, I'm most roasted to death."
"You have been in a warm room, while I have not seen a fire this
morning," said Dilly, meekly, as she closed the door and returned to her
place by the stove.
"Well, I wish I hadn't," answered the ireful Mrs. Peggy Nonce;--"a hard
fate is mine; sweltering over a great fire all my life, to cook for a
family that don't know nothing only to make the work as hard as they can.
Now, here's Mr. Pimble goes and gets you here to wash; never tells me a
word about it till you come right in upon me just as I have got my
breakfast things cleared away, settin'-room swept out, and fire all down
in the kitchen. I s'pose you have had nothing to eat to-day, for you
always come half starved, though why you do so I don't know, save to make
me work and get all you can out of us. When Mr. Pimble rents you that
great house so cheap, too! I declare, I should think, with all that man's
trials, he would get to be a hypocrite and believe in total
annihilation."
Dilly made no reply to this speech. Probably the latter part was beyond
her simple comprehension.
Mr. Pimble himself, the man of trials, as his housekeeper affirmed, now
opened the sitting-room door and looked forth. He was habited in a long,
faded, palm-figured bed-gown, all muffled up round his chin, and
sheep-skin slippers without heels. He had a lank, pale, discouraged
visage, and thin, light hair, streaked with gray, in a very untidy state
straggling about his face. He pulled his wrapper up yet closer about his
head, when he discovered the washerwoman, and shambled across the
clean-swept floor, his heelless slippers going clip-clap after him, as he
stalked along. What a gaunt, unhealthy-looking personage was the rich
Peter Paul Pimble, Esq., of Mudget Square!
"Well, you are come, then, are you?" said he, glancing toward the kitchen
clock, which was on the stroke of eight; "pretty time to commence a day's
work."
"And she has had no breakfast; and the water is not in the kettles," put
in dame Peggy. "I could have had that all hot for her, if you had just
told me she was comin' to wash. But some folks always like to be so sly
and underhanded."
"Stop your clack!" said the master, turning toward her with an angry
glance, "and get a bite of something to eat while she is putting her
water on and building a fire. I shall be at home through the day to
superintend matters and see that all is done to my wishes."
Thus saying, he scuffled back to his warm fire in the parlor; for, though
it was a bright morning in the early part of May, and odorous flowers
opening their petals to the genial sunbeams, and groups of singing birds
merry on all the foliage-covered trees, still Esq. Pimble was
cold--always cold, summer and winter. No genial influence could warm his
sluggish blood, or impart a glow to his dry, parchment-colored face.
There he sat; his feet poised on the fender, and a newspaper in his
skinny clutch, from which he seemed to read. Now and then he yawned,
stretched himself, approached the window, gazed forth for a moment with
some anxiety depicted on his expressionless face, and then sunk down in
his cushioned chair again. All the while the washing was going on briskly
in the kitchen. Peggy Nonce had outlived her morning's asperity, and
concluded to bake a batch of dried apple pies, as there must be a fire
kept in the stove for Billy, and it would save burning the wood another
day for the express purpose of cooking operations. So it appeared dame
Peggy, with all her tempers, had one good point at least, and one but
seldom found in servants,--a lookout for her employer's interests. The
bluffy housekeeper was given to gossip, too, as all of her class are; and
who could give her a better synopsis of the private affairs of half the
families in Wimbledon, than Dilly Danforth, the washerwoman, who
performed the drudgery and slop-work in many of the fine homes of the
upper class? But, after all, Peggy had more to give than receive; for by
some means the poor washerwoman did not seem possessed of the "gift of
gab." She was lamentably ignorant on many points where Peggy thought,
with her advantages, _she_ would have been well-informed and able to
answer any question proposed. And so the news-loving housekeeper, though
she remembered her master's interests in the article of firewood, was
fain to forget them in a matter of far more importance, and broached
forth into a long tale of his trials and domestic discomforts. Warming
with her discourse as she proceeded, her voice grew so shrill and
vehement, that Mr. Pimble, had he not been deeply engaged in poring over
the trials his loquacious housekeeper was so eloquently setting forth to
her silent and rather inattentive listener, he would have discovered
himself the hero of a tale which might have lost Mrs. Peggy Nonee a
place she had occupied half a lifetime. But Mr. Pimble sat in bed-gown
and slippers till dinner was announced at one P.M., and the three young
Pimbles tumbled into the hall in boisterous glee, just escaped from the
restraint of school discipline. They all rushed to the table at once,
and called for half a dozen kinds of food in a voice, which the glum,
abstracted father heaped indiscriminately on their plates. There was no
sound save the clatter of knives and forks for several minutes, while
the interesting family discussed their amply-provided and well-prepared
meal. At length Master Garrison Pimble, a lad of a dozen years, declared
sister Sukey had got the biggest piece of venison pie. Susan, a little
girl of seven summers, said she "didn't care if she had; she ought to
have."
"No, you oughtn't either," returned Master Garrison, "for you are not
half as big as I."
"I don't care for that," lisped Susan; "mammy says women ought to have
the best and most of everything, and do just what they like to, and go
just where they want to."
"Well, they shouldn't do any such thing, should they, father?" demanded
the argument-loving Garrison.
"Eat your dinners quietly, my children," returned the silent father, "and
not meddle with matters you do not understand."
"But I do understand them," continued the youth. "I know sister Sukey
ought not to have the largest piece of pie, and she shan't."
Thus saying, he made a dive at Miss Susan's plate, and bore off her
generous slice of venison pastry on his fork. Susey screamed at the top
of her voice, and, clutching her hands in her brother's hair, she pulled
it so vigorously he was fain to drop his prize, which fell to the carpet
and was devoured by a half-starved grimalkin, while he boxed his sister's
ears soundly for her vixen attack upon his bushy black hair.
"I'll learn you to pull my hair!" said he, with a very red face.
"I'll learn you to steal my pie!" shrieked she, as, maddened by her
smarting ears, she flew at him and dug long, bloody scratches in his
cheeks with her sharp little nails. The father now parted the combatants,
and shut the warlike Susey in the closet, where she was loud in
pronouncing maledictions against her brother, and heaping vituperations
upon her father; declaring, when mammy came home, she would tell her how
she was abused in her absence, and mammy would take sides with her,
because she knew men were all cross and ugly, and tried to hurt and wrong
poor feeble woman. Garrison and David finished their meal in silence; and
when the seminary bell rang to announce the hour for reoepening of school,
Mr. Pimble liberated Susey, and all went shouting off together.
Then he called in Dilly and the housekeeper, and, while they dined on the
fragments, went out in the kitchen to inspect the progress there. All
seemed to be moving on well, and, as he was returning to his seat by the
sitting-room fire, a covered buggy drove to the front piazza, and a
gentleman descended and assisted two ladies to alight. Directly the
parlor was dashed open, and the trio made their entry. Foremost was the
mistress of the mansion, Mrs. Judith Justitia Pimble. What a puny,
trembling thing appeared the husband, as he stood there like a galvanized
mummy in presence of that tall, portly woman, with her broad shoulders
and commanding aspect! Her first act was to smother the fire; her second,
to throw open the windows; her third, to ensconce herself in her liege
lord's easy-chair, and bid her guests lay aside their travelling garbs,
and make themselves at home. Finding his comfortable seat appropriated,
and no notice vouchsafed him, Mr. Pimble shuffled off into the kitchen.
"Was that your husband, sister Justitia?" inquired the lady visitor, as
she threw off her shawl and bonnet, with an energetic toss.
"Yes," answered the majestic lady in her most majestic tone, "that was
Pimble. You will not mind him at all; he is as near nothing as can be,--a
mere crank to keep the machine in motion,--you understand. He has his
sphere, however. The lowest brute animals have theirs. Pimble's is to
stay at home and superintend the minor matters of life, such as milking
the kine, feeding the chickens, and slaughtering a lamb occasionally to
subserve the grosser wants of poor human nature. In brief, all those
trivial and perplexing things in which a superior mind cannot be supposed
to feel an interest, and by which it is not right it should be fettered,
and prevented from soaring to its own lofty sphere of thought and
action."
Mrs. Pimble paused for breath as she delivered herself of the above
voluble speech, and the lady visitor replied:
"You speak heroicly, sister Justitia. I see you have obtained your
rightful position in your own household. O, would that all our crushed
and down-trodden sisters were possessed of but a tithe of your energy and
independence of character! Then would our young Reform, which encounters
on every side the swords and pickaxes of infuriate battalions of the
tyrant man, ride in triumphal chariot over our whole broad country's
proud domain!"
"Ah, sister Simcoe, how doth your inspired language fill my soul with
fire! I rejoice that you are come among us. How will your presence
encourage our ranks, and, in the triumph of your medical skill, vile male
usurpers of the healing art shall sink to rise no more! I long to read
again the proceedings of our late convention, the thrilling speeches, the
sweeping resolutions!"
"Let us thus occupy ourselves," said young Dr. Simcoe, turning toward a
remote corner of the apartment where sat the small man who had
accompanied the ladies, perched on a hard, uncushioned chair, his hands
folded in his lap, and his eyes bent studiously on the carpet. This was
the personage on whom the accomplished young medical practitioner had, a
few months previous, condescended to bestow the princely honor of her
hand.
"Sim," said the eloquent wife, as she glanced carelessly upon him, "where
are the portmanteaus?"
"In the entry," answered the small man, raising his eyes for a moment to
his fair consort's face.
"Bring them in and open them," said the lady, again sinking down in her
soft seat.
The small man disappeared in a twinkling, and the portmanteaus were soon
placed on the table, and their contents spread forth.
"I will now order some refreshment," said Mrs. Pimble;--"and while it is
preparing, we can amuse ourselves with the documents. What would you
prefer for your dinner, sister Simcoe?"
"Pea soup," returned the lady doctor; "that is my uniform dish,--simple
and plain."
"And Mr. Simcoe, what would he choose?"
"O, he has no choice!--anything that comes handiest will do for him."
Mrs. Pimble glanced toward Mr. Simcoe. Mr. Simcoe simpered and bowed. So
Mrs. Pimble swept into the kitchen to issue her commands. She started on
beholding Dilly Danforth bending over a wash-tub filled to the brim with
smoking linen, just out of a boiling suds. Darting one fiery glance
toward her forceless husband, sitting humped up over the stove, his head
supported on his hands, she exclaimed, "What does this mean?" Mr. Pimble
looked up vacantly; Peggy turned round from her occupation of washing the
dinner dishes, and Dilly kept to her wash-tub. No one seemed to
understand to whom the stately mistress addressed her brief
interrogatory. "Have you all lost your tongues?" at length exclaimed Mrs.
Pimble, in a louder tone; and, seizing her husband's chair, she gave it a
rough jerk, and demanded, "Are you dumb, Peter Pimble? What is that
beggar-woman,"--pointing toward Dilly,--"doing here?"
"Don't you see she is washing?" returned the husband, rather ironically.
"Well, by whose leave?"
"Mine."
"Yours?--and why have you brought a washerwoman into the house in my
absence, and without my permission?"
"Because all my linen was dirty."
"What if it was?"
"I wanted it washed."
"What for?"
"Because the spring courts are held in Olneyville next week."
"What if they are?"
"I would like to attend."
"You would, would you? No doubt, and confine me at home to superintend
the domestic affairs. No, Mr. Pimble, you don't enslave me in that
manner. I'm a free woman, and acknowledge no man master. I'll see if I'm
not mistress in my own house. Here, Dilly Danforth, take your hands out
of that wash-tub, and pack off home, instanter. There will be no more
washing done in my house to-day, or ever again, unless I order it done.
And you, Peggy Nonce, make a pea soup and broil a nice steak, with all
the appropriate dishes, and have a dinner prepared in half an hour, to
serve myself and guests."
There was an instant commotion in the kitchen, and the mistress swept
back to her guests in the parlor.
"She is a saucy wench,
Somewhat o'er full
Of pranks, I think--but then with growing years
She will outgrow her mischief and become
As staid and sober as our hearts could choose."
Mr. Salsify Mumbles was a grocer in a small way, and his good wife took
boarders,--young ladies and gentlemen from different parts of the
country, who came to attend Cedar Hill Seminary, a school of high repute
and extended celebrity. Her number was limited to three this summer,
because she conceived her health to be delicate, and because Mr. Salsify
had communicated to her in private that he was certainly "rising in his
profession;" and the quick-sighted lady foresaw the day speedily
approaching when she would no longer be obliged to perplex herself with
so ungrateful a class of beings as boarders, but should roll through the
streets of Wimbledon in her coach and four, the "observed of all
observers."
Mrs. Mumbles had one fair daughter, Mary Madeline, upon whom she doted
with true maternal fondness. This young lady was most perversely inclined
to smile upon one Mr. Dick Giblet, a clerk in her father's grocery. Mrs.
Mumbles was inconsolable, and Mr. Giblet was banished from the premises,
and taken into employ by the firm of Edson & Co., the largest merchants
in Wimbledon.
Rumor said these gentlemen were so well pleased with the young man, that
they had offered him a yearly salary of several hundred dollars, and
proposed, should he continue to perform his duties as well as hitherto,
to take him into the firm, on his coming of age. Mrs. Salsify now began
to regard Dick with different eyes, as what prudent mother would not? She
sent Mary Madeline to the store of Edson & Co., whenever she was in want
of a spool of cotton or yard of tape; but the young clerk had grown so
vain with his elevation, that he looked very loftily down upon her, bowed
in the most distant manner, and never exchanged more words with her than
were necessary in the buying and selling of an article. So Mary Madeline
told her mother, and upbraided her as the cause of the young man's cold
treatment. Mrs. Salsify bade her daughter be of good cheer. "'Twas all a
feint on Dick's part, to conceal his love till he was sure of hers,--all
would come round right in time." But Mary Madeline would not believe it,
and said she should die if she had to stay in the back store alone so
much, sorting spices and writing labels, for she was constantly thinking
of Dick, who used to be with her. She must have something to divert her
attention; and, at length, Mrs. Salsify hit upon the project of sending
her to school at the seminary one term. It was fitting that the daughter
of the rich Mr. Mumbles that was to be, should be possessed of suitable
polish and refinement to adorn the high circles in which her position
would call her to move. So Miss Mumbles answered to her name among the
two hundred scholars, male and female, that had assembled in the halls of
Cedar Hill Seminary, for the summer term. Quite a sensation she produced
in her gay muslin dress and fiery-colored silk apron; for Mrs. Salsify
declared her resolve to dress her tip-top. She was not the woman to half
do a thing, when she undertook; she always came up to the mark, or went a
little beyond. Better overshoot than fall short, was her motto. And when
Mary Madeline came home, on the evening of her debut at the seminary,
walking between the two young lady boarders, Amy Seaton and Jenny
Andrews, Mrs. Mumbles could not avoid drawing a comparison between the
three; and her daughter appeared to her like a blazing star between two
sombre clouds, for Miss Seaton and Miss Andrews, who were both orphans,
wore plain, dark gingham frocks and linen aprons. The third boarder was a
little brother of Miss Seaton's, about a dozen years of age. Charlie was
his name; a bright, intelligent boy, brimful of mischief and fun.
Mrs. Salsify kept no girl;--she could not find a good one, she said,--a
bad one she would not have, as long as she could manage to perform her
work herself, which she thought she could do with Mary Madeline's
assistance nights and mornings. It would not be for long, she trusted,
this slavery to boarders, for Mr. Salsify continued to inform her, at
stated intervals, that he was certainly "rising in his profession."
The husband and wife sat alone one evening, indulging in confidential
discourse, as 'tis said conjugal mates are wont to do on certain
occasions.
"Really," exclaimed Mrs. Mumbles, "it is astonishing, the quantity of
victuals these boarders consume. It is so unfeminine and indelicate for
young ladies to have appetites. I declare it quite shocks me to see the
large slices of bread and butter disappearing down Jenny Andrews' little
throat, and, as for that Charles Seaton, I believe he would eat a whole
plum pudding if he could get it. I left off making them long ago."
"I have not noticed one on the table for several days," returned Mr.
Salsify, "and, as I saw the last one was sent away untouched, I feared
they had detected the musty raisins."
"O, la, no! the greedy mugs don't know the difference, I assure you,"
answered the wife, "'twas only because they had stuffed themselves so
full of veal pie, that the pudding was not devoured." Just then Amy
Seaton came in and asked if she might get a lunch for Charlie, as he was
not in season for supper.
"O, yes!" answered Mrs. Salsify, in her blandest tone; "here are the
keys. I lock the pantry because Mr. Mumbles is so absent-minded he often
leaves the door open, and the cat gets in and devours the victuals. Get
just what you want for Charlie and a lunch for yourself and Jenny if you
choose."
"Thank you," said Amy taking the bunch of keys from Mrs. Salsify's hand.
Wide swung the pantry door on its creaking hinges, and Amy's eyes
brightened as she stepped in, thinking of the little feast they were to
have up stairs on the good lady's sudden fit of generosity. She glanced
her light eagerly along the shelves in search of pies and sweet cakes,
for she had seen Mrs. Salsify baking a large amount of good things that
morning; but nothing met her wistful gaze save a plateful of burnt
gingerbread crusts which had been picked over and left after the
evening's meal, a plate of refuse meat, and a few bits of salt cod-fish
in a broken saucer. She was about to go and tell Mrs. Mumbles her pantry
was destitute of victuals, when she recollected that lady superintended
her own work, and she should only inform her of what she already knew.
Several similar instances of the lady's singular generosity now occurred
to her mind. She recollected one day, on coming in unexpectedly from
school, of finding Mrs. Salsify buying a large quantity of cherries, and
of her saying she was going to pick them over, and would set them on the
dairy shelf where she might go and eat of them whenever she chose. But
Amy could not find them anywhere, and when she innocently asked Mrs.
Salsify where she had put them, that good lady, after blushing and
stammering a good deal, said they proved so dirty she was obliged to
throw them away. This and other similar occurrences decided Amy to say
nothing of the destitution of the pantry. So she returned the keys to her
boarding mistress, and, without a word, ascended to her room, where she
gave Charlie the bit of fish and crust of gingerbread she had obtained.
"Is this all I'm to have for my supper?" said he, looking ruefully on the
scanty, unpalatable food.
"'Tis all I can find in the pantry, bub," answered Amy; "can't you make
it answer for to-night? and to-morrow I will buy you something nice at
the bakery."
"Why," said Jenny, raising her dark, fun-loving eyes from a problem in
Euclid, "I saw Mrs. Mumbles baking mince pies, and custards and plum
cake, this morning."
"Bah," said Charlie, "I don't want any of her plum cake if she puts the
same kind of raisins in it she does in her puddings. But, Jenny, I think
I know where she keeps her nice victuals."
"Where?" asked Jenny, with an earnest look on Charlie's cunning face.
"Have you never noticed that great tin boiler under her bed?" Jenny burst
into an uncontrollable fit of laughter, which Amy vainly endeavored to
silence, and directly Mary Madeline appeared and said, "Mother would like
to have a little less noise if they could favor her, as she had company
below." Then the three sat down on the floor, and Jenny and Charlie
planned a midnight attack upon the tin boiler. Amy, who was more sedate
and cautious, advised them to desist; but 'twas just the exploit for
Jenny's frolicsome, mischievous temperament. Charlie was to take a
pillow-case, and creep softly under the bed, and fill it from the
supposed contents of the mysterious boiler, while Jenny stood at the
kitchen door to assist him in bearing the precious burden to their room.
How slow the hours passed after the plot was formed ere it could be
carried into execution! Mrs. Salsify in the parlor below kept wishing her
visitors would go, for she had never seen the wicks in the camphene lamps
of so surprising a length. They flooded the whole room with light, and
she recollected Jenny Andrews had asked the privilege of trimming them
after they were last used. She dared not rise and pick them down, for
such narrow-souled persons as she are always fearful that the truth will
be known and their littleness exposed; so she sat in a perfect fever,
watching the fluid getting every moment lower, and scarcely heeding the
remarks of her guests. At length they took their departure, and Mrs.
Salsify rushed in a sort of frenzy to the lamps, and dropped the caps
over the blazing wicks.
"Mary Madeline," said Mr. Mumbles, reprovingly, "don't you know how to
trim a lamp properly? Enough fluid has been wasted to-night by means of
those long wicks to last two evenings with wicks of a proper length."
"'Tis none of Maddie's doings," returned Mrs. S., "she is more prudent
than that. 'Twas that hussy of a Jenny Andrews who trimmed them after
Miss Pinkerton was here the other night."
"Well, the girl ought to pay for the waste she has occasioned," said Mr.
Salsify, gruffly. "Let us retire now; I declare 'tis near eleven
o'clock." The conspirators in the room above heard with eager ears the
departure of the guests, and sat in perfect silence till midnight chimed
from the old clock tower. Then Charlie Seaton, pillow-case in hand, crept
silently down the stairs with Jenny close behind him. Mrs. Mumbles'
bed-room opened out of the kitchen, and the door was always standing
ajar. Thus Charlie's quick eye had detected the boiler while sitting at
the dining table directly opposite her room. As he now paused a moment in
the kitchen before crossing the forbidden precincts, the deep-drawn
sonorous breathings convinced him that Mr. and Mrs. Salsify Mumbles were
lulled in their deepest nocturnal slumbers. Gently dropping on his knees,
he crawled softly to the object of plunder. Lucky chance! the cover was
off, and the first thing his hand touched was a knife plunged to the hilt
in a large loaf. This he captured and deposited in his bag. Then followed
pies, tarts, etc., and last a small jar, which he took under his arm,
and, thus encumbered, crept on all-fours to the kitchen door, where Jenny
relieved him of the jar. They softly ascended the stairs, where Amy was
ready to receive them.
"How dared you take that jar?" said she; "what does it contain?"
"I don't know," said Charlie; "but I know what my pillow-case contains.
It was never so well lined before, Amy."
Thus saying, he commenced removing its contents, while Jenny pulled the
knife out of the loaf, which proved to be pound cake, uncovered the jar,
and pronounced it filled with cherry jam. "Ay," said Amy, "there's where
those cherries I saw her buying of Dilly Danforth went, then. She told me
they were so dirty she had to throw them away. But I think you had better
go and carry these things back."
"Never," said Charlie; "I am going to eat my fill once in Mrs. Mumbles'
house."
"But what will she say when she discovers her loss?"
"That is just what I'm anxious to know," said Jenny.
"So am I," returned Charlie, chopping off a large slice of pound cake and
dividing two pies in halves. "The old lady goes in for treating her
visitors well, don't she? I dare say these condiments were intended to
supply her guests for years. I wish we had some spoons to eat this cherry
jam."
"You had better carry that back," said Amy.
"No, I will not go down on my knees and crawl under Mrs. Salsify's bed
again to-night on any consideration."
"Neither would I," said Jenny, "the old adage is 'as well be killed for a
sheep as a lamb;' so let us enjoy ourselves to the utmost in our power.
Here is food enough, of the best kind too, to serve us well for the
remainder of our stay here, only a week longer you know. I'll keep it
locked in my trunk."
So saying, they cleared away, and Charlie bade good-night, and all
retired to bright visions of pound cake and cherry jelly.
"She was a lovely little ladye,
With blue eyes beaming sunnily;
And loved to carry charity
To the abodes of misery."
There was a tiny bark floating down the flower-bordered river that wound
so gracefully through the beautiful village of Wimbledon, and a smiling
little lady, in a neat gingham sun-bonnet, sat coseyly in the stern,
beneath the shady wing of the snow-white sail. A noble-looking lad plied
the oar with graceful ease, chatting merrily the while with the little
girl, and laughing at her constant and matronly care of a large basket
which was placed beside her, neatly covered with a snowy napkin. "One
would think that there were diamonds in that basket, Nell, you guard it
so carefully," said he.
"No, only nice pies mother gave me leave to take to Aunt Dilly Danforth,
the poor washerwoman," returned the little miss, again smoothing the
napkin and adjusting the basket in a new position. "I wish you would row
as carefully as you can, Neddie, so as not to jostle them much."
"So I will, sis," returned he; "let's sing the Boatman's Song as we glide
along." And their voices rose on the calm summer air clear and sweet as
the morning song of birds. Now and then their light barge touched the
shore, and Ned plucked flowers to twine in Ellen's hair. O, that ever,
down life's uncertain tide, these innocent young spirits might float as
calmly, happily on to the broad ocean of eternity!
"Is that the old shanty where Dilly lives?" said the lad at length,
pointing to a low black house, just beyond a clump of brushwood, which
they were swiftly approaching.
"Yes," said Ellen, gathering up her basket.
"Here I must lose you, then," said Ned; "how I wish you would go fishing
with me down to the cove!"
Ellen smiled. "Are you going to be all alone, Neddie?" asked she.
"Nobody but Charlie Seaton will be with me. You like him."
"Yes, I like him well enough," said Ellen, innocently; "but I would not
care to go a-fishing with him."
"Why not, sis?" inquired Ned.
"Because it would not be pretty for a little girl to go fishing with
boys."
"Ha, ha!" laughed the lad; "what a prudent little sis I have got! for all
the world like Amy Seaton. But I like Jenny Andrews better, she is so
full of fun and frolic. Did you know how she and Charlie Seaton robbed
old Mrs. Salsify Mumbles, one night not long since?"
"O, no! robbed her? That was wrong, surely."
"O, no! You see she nearly starved them, so they helped themselves to her
sweetmeats without invitation. That's all; not very wicked, I'm thinking,
Nell."
"I think it was wicked for her not to give them enough food, and wicked
for them to take it without her knowledge," said Ellen, after a pause.
"But what did she say when she discovered her loss?"
"Not a word. What could she say?" asked Ned.
"I could not guess, and therefore inquired," said Ellen. "Will Jenny come
to school next term?"
"Yes, Jenny, Amy and Charlie, and board at Dea. Allen's. That will be a
good place; only I fancy the deacon's long prayers and sober phiz will
prove a sad trial to Jenny. Well, you must go, sis," said he, pushing his
boat high up on the green, grassy bank, by a few skilful strokes of his
oar. Then assisting her out and placing the precious basket safely in her
arms, he was soon gliding down the smooth current again. Ellen directed
her steps toward the dilapidated dwelling a few yards before her, turning
frequently to catch a glimpse of her brother's little bark as it came in
view through some opening in the shrubbery that grew on the river's side.
One timid rap brought Willie Danforth to the door. The poor boy looked
quite embarrassed to behold pretty, neat Ellen Williams standing there on
the miserable, dirty threshold. "Good day, Willie," said she, pleasantly;
"is your mother at home?"
"No, miss, she is scrubbing floors at Mr. Pimble's," said Willie,
awkwardly enough.
"O, I am sorry she is gone, for I wanted to see her very much. Will you
let me come in and leave this basket for her?"
"O, yes!" answered the poor lad, "or I will carry it in for you."
"I can carry it very well," said Ellen, "if you will only let me go in."
"I would let you come in, Miss Ellen," returned Willie, "only I am afraid
it would frighten you to see such a sad, dirty place;" and the ragged
little fellow blushed crimson, as he thus revealed his poverty and
destitution.
Ellen pitied his embarrassment, and said, "I should like to go in,
Willie, because, if I saw what you needed, I could tell mother, and she
would make you more comfortable, I know."
The boy lifted the wooden latch of the inner room. The door opened with a
dismal creak, and Ellen entered. There was one old, broken-backed chair,
which he offered her, and sat down himself on a rough bench, with a
sorrowful, embarrassed expression on his pale, interesting features.
Ellen, still noticing Willie's painful confusion, knew not what to do
after placing her basket on the rude, wooden table, and began to regret
that she so strongly pressed an entrance.
"I told you you would be frightened," said the boy at length, in a
choking tone.
"O, I am not frightened!" returned Ellen, glad to speak now that he had
opened the way for her; "I am only sorry to find people living so
forlornly in our pretty, happy village. I thought you had a good nice
house to live in, for Mrs. Pimble said so, and that her husband rented it
to you for almost nothing, and that your mother--but I won't say any
more," said Ellen, stopping short in her discourse.
"Yes," said Willie, "tell me all she said, and then I will tell you
something."
"Well, then, she said your mother only went out washing to make folks
think she was needy, so they would give her food and clothing. 'Twas
wicked for her to say it, surely."
Willie's face grew pale as death, and then flushed crimson to the
temples.
"Don't look so," said Ellen, approaching the bench and putting her little
hand on his hot cheeks. "O, Willie! you are sick and tired," she
continued, soothingly; "will you not lay your head down on my lap, and
tell me all about your troubles?"
Willie's full heart overflowed. Those accents of kindness, so strange to
his ears, what a magic power they had! He leaned his dear bright head on
her soft little palm, and his low voice told in broken accents a tale of
want and suffering. Ellen wept, for her young heart was full of
tenderness and sympathy. The hours sped on, while they thus held
converse, till a hand on the latch aroused them. 'Twas Dilly returned
from her day's work at Mr. Pimble's. Willie sprang up to meet her. "O,
mother!" said he, "a sweet angel has come since you left me, this
morning, crying because I was so hungry."
"Alas, my boy!" said the woman, "I fear you must still go hungry, for I
have brought you nothing. Mr. Pimble says my week's work must go for
rent."
Now was Ellen's moment of joy, as she bounded across the broken floor and
lifted the napkin from her basket. "No, no, Willie,--no, no, Aunt Dilly,
you shall not go hungry to bed to-night. Look what mother has sent you!
How thoughtless of me not to have remembered my basket before, when
Willie has been suffering from hunger all these long, long hours!"
"O, no! I have not thought of being hungry since you came," said the boy.
Mrs. Danforth approached the basket and gazed on its contents with
tearful eyes. She had not seen the like on her table for many a day, and,
dropping on her knees, she breathed a silent prayer to God for his
goodness in putting it into the hearts of his children to remember her in
her need! Willie brought forth a small bundle of sticks and lighted a
fire, while Ellen ran and filled a black, broken-nosed tea-kettle, and
hung it on a hook over the blaze. It soon began to sing merrily, and the
children laughed and said it had caught some of their happiness. Then
Ellen took some tea from the paper her mother had wrapped so nicely, put
it in a cracked blue bowl, and Willie fixed a bed of coals for her to set
it on. Dilly sat all the while gazing with tearful eyes on the two
beaming faces which were constantly turned up to hers, to see if she gave
her approval to their movements. At length the repast was prepared, and,
after partaking with them, as Mrs. Danforth insisted upon her doing,
Ellen set out for home, with Willie by her side. He hesitated some at
first, when his mother told him he must accompany her, for his jacket was
ragged and his shoes out at the toes. But when Ellen said so
reproachfully he was "too bad, too bad, to make her go all the way home
alone," he brightened, and said "he would be very glad to go with her if
she would not be ashamed of him." So they set out together, each holding
a handle of the basket; Ellen bidding Aunt Dilly a cordial good-by, and
promising to come soon again and bring her mother. They met Mr. Pimble on
their way, who scowled and passed by in silence.
Ellen found her mother anxiously waiting her return. She heard with
pleasure and interest her little daughter's animated description of her
visit; but when she said she had promised to visit Aunt Dilly soon again,
and take her mother with her, Mrs. Williams looked sad.
"What makes you look so, dear mamma?" said Ellen; "will you not go and
see poor Dilly?"
"I shall be very glad to do so, my dear child," answered the fond mother,
"if it is possible. You know your father has often wished to remove to a
place where his skill in architecture might be employed to better
advantage, and an excellent opportunity now offers for him to dispose of
his situation here, and remove to a large city, where his services will
be in constant demand."
"And I shall never see Willie Danforth again," said Ellen, bursting into
tears.
Childhood is so simple and unaffected, ever expressing with innocent
confidence its dearest thought, and claiming sympathy! Mrs. Williams
tried long to comfort her little daughter, and at length succeeded by
holding out a prospect that she might some time return and visit her
early associates. Ned was consoled by the same prospect. But then, we
never know, when we leave a place, what changes may occur ere we revisit
its now familiar scenes. Mrs. Williams felt this truth more vividly than
her children. But few changes had marked their sunny years, and it never
occurred to their youthful minds but what Wimbledon as she was to-night
would be exactly the same should they return five or ten years hence. The
mother did not disturb this pleasant illusion, "for experience comes
quite soon enough to young hearts," she said, "and I'll not force her
unwelcome lessons upon my happy children." So Ned and Ellen, when it was
decided they should leave on the morrow, almost forgot the pangs of
departure from their rich, beautiful home, so intently were they dwelling
on the joy of returning and meeting their schoolmates and companions
after a period of separation. O, gay, light-hearted youth! What is there
in all life's after years, its gaudy pomp, its feverish flame, or
short-lived honors, that can atone for the loss of thy buoyant hopes, and
simple, trusting faith?
Sad was poor Dilly Danforth when she heard of the sudden departure of the
benevolent Williams family, and bitterly she exclaimed, "No good thing is
long vouchsafed the poor. Our poverty will only seem the darker now for
having been brightened for a transient hour."
Willie, who had returned from his walk with Ellen with severe pains in
his limbs and head, fell sick of a rheumatic fever, and suffered much for
the want of warm clothing, care and medical treatment. O, how often he
thought of Ellen! "If she were there he would not suffer thus. She would
be warmth, care, clothing and physician for him."
His mother was obliged to labor every day to procure fuel for the fire;
and to warm the great, cold room, where the piercing autumn blasts blew
through wide gaping cracks and chasms, and get a bottle of wormwood
occasionally, with which to bathe his aching limbs, was the utmost her
efforts could accomplish. With this insufficient care, 'twas no wonder
Willie grew rapidly worse. One bitter cold night Dilly sat down utterly
discouraged as she placed the last stick of wood on the fire. Her boy had
been so ill for several days she could not leave him to go to her
accustomed labor, and consequently the small pile of fuel was consumed.
What was she to do? Willie was already crying of cold, and she sat over
the expiring blaze crying because she had naught to render him
comfortable. After a while he grew silent, and, softly approaching, she
found he had sunk into a quiet slumber. Carefully covering him with the
thin, tattered blankets, she pinned a shawl over her head, and, softly
closing the door behind her, stole forth into the biting night air, and
directed a hasty tread toward Mr. Pimble's great brick mansion. A bright
light gleamed through the kitchen windows as she ascended the steps and
gave a hurried knock. Directly she heard a shuffling sound, and knew Mr.
Pimble, in his heelless slippers, was approaching. Fast beat her heart as
the door opened, and she beheld his gaunt form and unyielding features.
"What brings you here this bitter cold night, Dilly Danforth?" exclaimed
he, in a surly tone, as the furious blast rushed in his face, and nearly
extinguished the lamp he held in his skinny grasp.
She stepped inside, and he closed the door.
"'Tis the bitter cold night which brings me, Mr. Pimble," she said,
feeling she must speak quickly, for Willie was at home alone; "my boy is
sick and suffering from cold. For myself, I would not ask a favor, but
for him I entreat you to give me an armful of wood to keep him from
perishing."
"Why don't you work and buy your wood?" asked he, angered by this sudden
demand upon his charity.
"I worked as long as I could leave my child," answered Mrs. Danforth,
"and I thought maybe you would be willing to allow me something for my
work here."
"Allow you something, woman? Don't I give you the rent of that great
house for the few light chores you do for us, which really amount to
nothing? Your impudence is astonishing;" and Esq. Pimble's voice quivered
with rage, as he thus addressed the trembling woman.
Dilly stood irresolute, and Mr. Pimble was silent a few moments, when a
voice from the parlor called out, imperiously, "Pimble, I want you!"
The man roused himself and rushed to the door in such haste as to lose
both his slippers.
"What are you blabbing about out there?" Dilly heard Mrs. Pimble ask, in
an angry tone.
"Dilly Danforth has come for some wood," was the moody reply.
"And so you are giving wood to that lazy, foolish, stupid creature, are
you?"
"No, I am not. She says her boy is sick and she has no fire."
"A pretty tale, and I hope 'tis true. She'll learn by and by her sin and
folly. If she had asserted her own rights, as she should have done, and
left her drunken husband and moping boy years ago, she might have been
well off in the world by this time. But she chose like an idiot to live
with him and endure his abuses till he died, and since she has tied
herself to that foolish boy. O, I have no patience with such stupid
women! They are a disgrace to the true female race. Go and tell her to go
home and never enter my doors a-begging again."
Dilly did not wait to receive this unfeeling message, but pulled her thin
blanket around her, and stole out in the chill night air, and ran toward
home as swiftly as possible. She stumbled over something on the
threshold. It was a bundle of firewood. How came it there? She could not
tell, but seized it in her arms, ran hastily in, and approached Willie's
bed-side. He was still sleeping tranquilly, and that night a comfortable
fire, lighted by unknown generosity, blazed on the lowly hearth.
"There is a jarring discord in my ear,
It setteth all my soul ashake with fear,
Good sir, canst drive it off?"----
All Wimbledon was aroused one cold November morning by a direful
conglomeration of sounds;--strange, discordant shrieks, ominous groans,
a clanking, as of iron chains and fetters, a slow, heavy, elephantine
tread gradually growing on the ear, and a deep, continuous rumbling as of
earthquakes in the bowels of the earth. Mrs. Salsify Mumbles, nervous and
delicate as she was, clung fast to the neck of her liege lord when he
attempted to throw open the sash of his window, to discover the import of
this unusual disturbance of the nocturnal stillness of Wimbledon. Good
Deacon Allen, who was lying on his deaf ear, became restless, and visions
of the final retribution and doom of the wicked harassed his slumbers.
Suddenly he awoke, and dismal groans and unearthly rumblings struck his
terrified ear. "Sally! Sally!" said he, leaping from bed and giving his
sleeping spouse a vigorous shake, "why sleepest thou? arise and don thy
drab camlet and high-crowned cap, and prepare to meet thy Lord; for
behold he cometh!"
"Samuel," said the good wife but half awake, "you are prating in your
sleep. Return to your pillow and be quiet till day-break."
"You speak like a foolish virgin, Sally," returned the excited deacon.
"Do you not hear the roaring of the resurrection thunder and the wailings
of the wicked?"
"I do hear something," said Mrs. Allen, now poking her night-capped head
from beneath the blankets, and listening a moment attentively. "'Tis a
sound of heavy carts drawn by oxen over frozen ground. Ay, I guess it is
the new family, that bought out neighbor Williams, moving their goods.
Just look out the window,--our yards join,--and see if there is not a
stir there." The deacon obeyed.
"O, yes," said he, "I can distinguish several loaded teams and dusky
figures moving to and fro."
"I thought 'twas the new-comers," returned the wife, who possessed more
ready wit and shrewdness than her amiable consort, and, withal, could
hear vastly better. "You had better come to bed again, Samuel;--'tis an
hour to daylight."
"I cannot get to sleep again, I have been so disturbed," said the
husband, fidgetting round in the dark room to find his clothes.
"O, pshaw!--put your deaf ear up and you'll soon fall off," answered the
wife, drawing the covering over her head. Deacon Allen, who had a very
high opinion of his wife's good sense, concluded to follow her advice,
and the happy couple were soon enjoying as pleasant a morning snooze, as
though neither the resurrection nor the "new family" had disturbed their
slumbers.
Jenny Andrews and Amy Seaton, who slept in the room above, never heard a
sound, nor did Charlie in his cosey chamber beyond, and great was the
astonishment of the young people, on opening their casements, to behold
the long line of heavy-loaded teams drawn up in the yard of the splendid
mansion which stood next above Dea. Allen's, the former residence of Esq.
Williams. Teamsters in blue frocks were unfastening the smoking oxen from
the ponderous carts, and as the girls hurried below to impart the
intelligence of the arrival of the new family to Mrs. Allen, they heard
the voice of Mrs. Salsify Mumbles, and entering the sitting-room found
that lady laying aside her bonnet and shawl. Mary Madeline was standing
by the window gazing into the adjoining yard. Jenny and Amy had not seen
their former boarding mistress since they left her house at the close of
the summer term, several months before. But she was so elate about the
arrival of the new family that all memory of their former ill-usage
seemed to have escaped her, and she grasped the hands of both and shook
them cordially. "I am glad to see you," she exclaimed; "why have you not
called on us this fall? Mary Madeline has often said I wish Jenny and Amy
would come in, it would seem so much like old times. Here, my dear," said
she, seizing hold of the young lady's shawl and pulling her from the
window, "don't be so taken up with the new family that you can't speak to
your old friends." Mary Madeline now turned and spoke to her former
schoolmates. Then, drawing a chair close to the window, she resumed her
gaze, with her gloves and handkerchief lying unheeded on the floor and
her gay shawl dragging behind her. "O, mother! mother!" she exclaimed at
length, "there comes the family."
Mrs. Salsify, who was engaged in telling Mrs. Allen of Mr. Salsify's
prosperity, and how he was "rising in his profession," and how he
meditated adding another story to his house and putting a piazza round it
next spring, dropped all, even her snuff-box, and rushed to the window as
a large covered wagon, drawn by a span of elegant black horses, drove
rapidly into the adjoining yard. First alighted a tall man in a black
overcoat,--the master no doubt, the gazers decided,--then a tall man in a
gray overcoat, then a tall man in a brown overcoat. And the man in the
black overcoat and the man in the gray overcoat moved away, the former up
the steps of the mansion and around the terraces, trying the fastenings
of the Venetian blinds, and examining the cornices and pillars of the
porticos; the latter turned in the direction of the stables and
outhouses, while the man in the brown overcoat assisted three ladies to
alight, all grown-up women, one short and fat, the other two tall and
thin. The gazers were a little puzzled by the appearance of the new
family. As far as they could discover there was no great difference in
the respective ages of the six individuals who had alighted from the
wagon, and Mrs. Salsify Mumbles declared it as her opinion that the
family consisted of three brothers who had married three sisters for
their wives. The short, fat woman, who had a rubicund visage and
turned-up nose, and wore a broad-plaided cashmere dress, drew forth a
bunch of keys from a wicker basket that hung on her arm, and with a
pompous tread ascended the marble steps, unlocked the broad,
mahogany-panelled door, turned the massive silver knob, and, swinging it
wide, strode in, the tall ladies in blue cloaks following close behind.
Soon sashes began to be raised, blinds flew open, and the tall ladies
were seen standing on high chairs hanging curtains of rich damask and
exquisitely wrought muslin, before the deep bay windows. The three tall
men threw off their overcoats, and, with the assistance of the
blue-frocked teamsters, commenced the business of unlading the carts.
"All the furniture is bagged," said Mrs. Salsify, impatiently; "one
cannot get a glimpse to know whether 'tis walnut, or rosewood, or
mahogany. They mean to make us think 'tis pretty nice, whether 'tis or
not; but we shall find out some time, for they can't always be so shy.
Well, Mary Madeline," she added, turning to her daughter, "we may as well
go home, I guess;--there's nothing to be seen here but chairs and sofas
sewed up in canvas. I thought I would run over a few minutes, Mrs. Allen,
as I knew your windows looked right into the yard of the new comers, and
we could get a good view. Of course, we wanted to know what sort of folks
we were going to have for neighbors. I hope they'll be different from the
Williams'."
"Why?" asked Mrs. Allen, looking up from the brown patch she was engaged
in sewing on the elbow of the deacon's black satinet coat. "I only hope
they will prove as good neighbors and I will be perfectly satisfied."
"O, I don't know but what the Williams' were good enough, but they were
too exclusive, too aristocratic for me. Mrs. W. never thought Mary
Madeline fit for her Ellen to associate with."
"How do you know she thought so?" asked Mrs. Allen; "for my part, I lived
Mrs. Williams' nearest neighbor for ten years or more, and always
considered her a very kind-hearted, unassuming woman, wholly untainted
with the pride and haughtiness which too often disfigure the characters
of those who possess large store of this world's goods and move in the
upper circles."
"Well, you were more acquainted with Mrs. Williams than I was, of course;
but she was not the kind of woman to suit my taste. There's Mrs. Pimble
and Mrs. Lawson now, both rich and splendid, keep their carriages and
servants, but they are not above speaking to common people."
"I am not personally acquainted with those ladies," answered Mrs. Allen.
"They are reformers," said Mrs. Mumbles, in a reverential tone; "you
should hear their awful speeches. Daniel Webster could never equal them,
folks tell me."
"I have understood that they belonged to the fanatical class of female
lecturers that have arisen in our country within the last few years."
"O, they hold conventions everywhere, and such terrible gesticulations as
they pronounce against the tyranny and oppression of the female sex by
the monster man!" said Mrs. Salsify. "I declare I wish they would have
one of their indignation meetings here, for I think the men are getting
the upper hand among us."
"Doubtless you would join their ranks should they do so," observed Mrs.
Allen, with a quiet smile, as she arose, gave the deacon's coat a shake,
and hung it on a peg behind the door.
"Well, I don't know but I should," returned Mrs. S.; "but come, Maddie,
how we are wasting time! I declare, two carts are already unloaded, and
there goes the seminary bell. 'Tis nine o'clock." Jenny, Amy and Charlie,
ran down stairs all equipped for school, as Mrs. Mumbles and her daughter
stepped into the hall, and all went forth together. Mrs. M. repeated her
invitation for the young ladies and Charlie to visit her, and the girls
laughingly promised to do so at their first leisure. Mary Madeline went
to Edson's store on an errand, and her mother proceeded directly home.
Great was her anger to behold the back kitchen door swinging wide. She
shut it behind her with a slam, muttering some impatient exclamation
about Mr. Salsify's stupid carelessness. As she stood by the stove
warming her chilled fingers, a noise from the pantry startled her ears,
and, opening the door, she beheld the great, shaggy watch-dog, that
belonged to the store of Edson & Co., lying on his haunches with a nice
fat pullet between his paws, which he was devouring with evident relish
and gusto. He turned his head towards her, uttered a low growl, and went
on with his breakfast again. Mrs. Salsify looked up to a peg on which she
had hung six nicely-dressed chickens the night before. Alas! the last one
was between the bloody devourer's paws. She glanced toward a pot she had
left full of cream, under the shelves. It was empty; and toward her
rolling-board, where she had left a pan of rich pie-crust, with which she
was intending to cover her thanksgiving pies. All had disappeared. She
trembled with rage.
"Get out, you thievish rascal!" she exclaimed, bringing her foot
violently to the floor.
The dog sprang toward her, and, seizing the skirt of her gay-striped,
bombazine dress with his glistening ivories, rent it from the waist, flew
through the parlor window, and rushed through streets, by-lanes and
alleys, rending the flaring fabric, and dragging it through mud-holes
till it looked like some fiery-colored flag borne away by the enemy in
disgrace.
Mrs. Salsify rushed down into her husband's shop in awful plight, her
hair standing on end, and her great, green eyes almost starting from
their sockets. Mr. Salsify looked with amazement on his lady, as did also
the half-score of customers that stood around his counters. Her
saffron-colored skirt was rent in divers places, revealing the black one
she wore beneath, and the gay-striped waist she still wore was hung round
with ragged fragments of the vanished skirt.
"Lord, love us, what is the matter?" exclaimed Mr. Salsify, rushing
toward his wife.
"Edson's dog has eat up six chickens, a cream-pot, a rolling-board,
pie-crust, and all!" exclaimed Mrs. Mumbles, with a frantic air, as she
fell into her husband's outstretched arms, wholly unmindful of the
laughter her appearance and words had excited among her good man's
customers.
"Edson's dog,--how could he get into the house?" demanded Mr. Mumbles.
"I saw him out with Dick Giblet, this morning, when he was leaving
packages," said little Joe Bowles, with a mischievous leer in his black
eyes.
The husband and wife exchanged a glance. The whole truth flashed upon
them,--'twas a trick of Dick's. Mr. Salsify ordered his customers to
leave the shop, and locking the door, he led his terrified, trembling
wife up stairs, where they found Mary Madeline lying on the floor in a
fainting fit, with the fragments of her mother's skirt clenched tightly
in her cold hands.
"Her face was fairer than face of earth;
What was the thing to liken it to?
A lily just dipped in the summer dew?
Parian marble--snow's first fall?
Her brow was fairer than each,--than all.
And so delicate was each vein's soft blue,
'Twas not like blood that wandered through.
Rarely upon that cheek was shed,
By health or by youth, one tinge of red,
And never closest look could descry,
In shine or shade, the hue of her eye,
But, as it were made of light, it changed
With every sunbeam that over it ranged."
The midnight stars were over all the heaven, O, wildly, wildly bright!
Orion, like a flaming monarch, led up "the host of palpitating stars" to
their proud zenith, while, far in the boreal regions, danced strange,
atmospheric lights, with flitting, fantastic motions and ever-changing
forms and colors. A young girl stood in the deep recess of a large
window, with the rich, blue-wrought damask curtains wrapped closely about
her slight, fragile form, gazing intently on the splendors of the
midnight heaven. Long she stood there, and no sound broke the stillness,
save now and then a half-audible sigh. At length she said, "I cannot
endure this solitude and the depression which is stealing over me. Would
that I had a mother to love and bless me! Father is often so strange and
silent, and Rufus cannot sympathize with my feelings. I must call Sylva
to bear me company, for one of my nervous attacks is upon me, and I
cannot sleep." Softly opening a side-door, she said, in a voice scarcely
above a whisper, "Sylva, are you awake?"
"Yes," was the answer; "what is your wish, Miss Edith?"
"That you would come and sit with me a while."
"What time is it!"
"I know not; but, by the stars, it should be little after midnight."
"Return to your room, and I will soon be there with a light," answered
the one called Sylva.
The young girl did as requested, and sank down in a large arm-chair which
nearly concealed her in its soft cushions. Presently the small side-door
opened, and Sylva entered, bearing an astral lamp and a few light pieces
of kindling wood.
"O, I don't mind a fire!" said Miss Edith.
"Well, I do," answered the woman; "you would catch your death, up here
half the night with no fire."
"'Tis a cold place we are come to, isn't it Sylva?" said the young lady,
springing from her chair and wrapping an elegant cashmere dressing-gown,
lined with azure satin, round her tall, delicate figure, and then again
sinking down among the soft velvet cushions of her spacious fauteuil.
"Yes, Miss Edith, it is, indeed," answered Sylva, as she lighted a bright
fire in the polished grate. "How your father expects to rear so fragile a
bud in this bleak region I do not know."
"I have never seen him in such spirits as since we came here," returned
Edith, toying with the silken tassels of her rich robe. "You know he was
always so silent and reserved in our former home, Sylva. But sometimes I
fancy there is something unnatural in his manner. One moment he will
laugh wildly, and the next a dark frown will have gathered on his brow.
Twice he has caught me in his arms and said, 'Edith! Edith, you have a
part to play, and I rely on you to do it!' Then he would look on me so
sternly, I would burst into tears, and strive to free myself from his
embrace. What did he mean by such words, Sylva?"
"Why, that you are coming on to the stage of action, and he desires you
to be educated and accomplished in a manner to adorn the high circles in
which you will move."
"O, more than that, Sylva!" said Edith doubtfully; "he need not have
looked so stern, were that all; but still he is a kind, indulgent father
for the most part. I should not complain;" and the young girl relapsed
into thoughtful silence. The pale fire-light glowed on her delicate
features. One tiny white hand rested on the cushioned arm of the chair,
and the large, melancholy blue eyes were fixed on the glowing blaze
within the shining ebon grate. The profile was strictly Grecian in
outline, and the soft, silken hair fell in a shower of golden ripples
over her small, sloping shoulders. Her lips were vermilion red, and
disclosed two rows of tiny pearls whenever they parted with dimpling
smiles.
"Have you become acquainted with any of the village people, Sylva?" asked
the fair girl, rousing at length from her reverie.
"No, save this young Mrs. Edson, who called yesterday, I have seen no
one," returned the woman, "unless I mention that sunken-eyed washerwoman,
Dilly Danforth, as she is called."
"O, I saw her on the steps one day! What a forlorn-looking creature she
is! I think she must be very poor. Still, it seems to me there should be
no poverty in this rich, happy-appearing village. I fancy it will be a
love of a place in summer, Sylva, when all the maples and lindens are in
leaf, and the numerous gardens in flower. O, when father took me out in
the new sleighing phaeton last week, I saw a most magnificent mansion,
grander than ours, even. The grounds seemed beautifully laid out, and
over the arching gateway I read the words 'Summer Home' sculptured in the
marble. It is closed at present, but when the occupants return in the
spring, I hope I shall get to know them, for I would dearly love to visit
at so delightful a place. Father said I should become acquainted with the
family. He knows their names, and I think said he had met the gentleman
once." Edith grew quite smiling and happy as she prattled on, forming
plans and diversions for the coming summer. Sylva listened to her
innocent conversation in respectful silence, and, after a while, as the
fire burned low, and the cocks began to crow from their neighboring
perches, the sweet girl ceased to speak. She had wearied herself and
fallen asleep.
The sun was shining brightly through the blue damask curtains when she
awoke, and Sylva was bending over her, parting away the rich masses of
auburn curls which had fallen over her face as she leaned her head over
the arm of the chair. "Your father and Rufus are calling for you," said
the attendant pleasantly.
"Why, how long I have slept!" said Edith, opening her blue eyes with a
wondering expression. "What o'clock is it, Sylva?"
"It is half-past nine," answered the woman.
"I have been dreaming the strangest dream about that beautiful mansion I
was telling you I saw in my ride the other day--that 'Summer Home,' as it
is so sweetly styled. I thought I saw a lovely young girl there, younger
than myself, but far more womanly in aspect, and she said she was my
cousin, and kissed me, and gave me rare flowers and delicious fruit. Did
you say father had called for me? Well, I'll dress and go down in the
parlor. What are you doing there, Sylva?"
"Getting your muff and tippet," answered she.
"Is father going to take me out?" asked Edith with animation.
"Rufus is going to take you to church," said Sylva. "He said you
expressed a wish to go last Sabbath, but it was too cold. To-day is more
pleasant, and he is ready to attend you."
"He is kind," said Edith. "Am I not a naughty girl to murmur when I have
a brother so good, and a father who loves me so dearly?"
"You do not murmur, do you, Miss Edith?"
"Sometimes I wish I had a mother, or that she had lived long enough to
leave her form and features impressed on my memory."
A tear fell as the fair girl spoke thus, but she brushed it quickly away,
and commenced arraying herself for church.
"I shall be delighted to behold the interior of that antiquated looking
building," remarked she, as Sylva placed the dainty hat over the
clustering curls; "and, besides, I can see all the village people, and
form some opinion of those who are henceforth to constitute our
associates and friends."
"And all the people will see you, too," said Sylva, smiling.
"O, I don't mind that!" answered Edith; "they would all see me, sooner or
later, as I'm to go to school, in the spring, at the white seminary on
the hill."
Thus speaking, the beautiful girl descended to the drawing-room. A tall,
elegantly-proportioned man, with a magnificent head of raven black hair,
which hung in one dense mass of luxuriant curls all round his broad,
marble-like brow, and quite over his manly shoulders, was leaning in a
careless, graceful attitude against a splendid mahogany-cased piano, that
stood in the centre of the apartment, and moving his white, taper fingers
over the pearl-tipped keys, waking now rich bursts of song, and, anon,
dwelling long on deep, solemn notes, that pierced the soul with
melancholy. He did not move when the door opened, and Edith crossed the
room and stood beside him ere he noticed her presence.
"Where is brother Rufus?" she asked, drawing on her tiny, lemon-colored
gloves.
The gentleman turned and gazed down upon the fair speaker. The clear
complexion and soft blue eyes of the daughter were exact counterparts of
the father's; so were the rich red lips and pearly teeth. Their only
point of difference was in the color of the hair. "What do you want of
Rufus?" asked he, in a tone almost stern, after he had gazed on her
several moments in silence. She turned her speaking eyes upon his face,
and answered, "Sylva said he would take me to church."
"To church!" said her father, now relaxing his features into a smile,
"what an odd fancy! And are you arrayed in this fine garb to attend
service in an old, dilapidated country church?"
"Do you think me very finely-dressed?" said Edith, archly, as she for a
moment surveyed herself in the large mirror which hung from ceiling to
floor between the eastern windows. She wore a crimson velvet dress and
mantle, a muff and tippet of white ermine, and a chapeau of light blue
satin, with a long, drooping white plume. Her hair was gathered into
luxuriant masses of curls each side of her sweet face, and confined by
sprays of pearls and turquoises.
Rufus now entered. He was very unlike his sister in personal appearance.
His hair was the color of his father's, but far less abundant, and
straight as an Indian's. Eyes and complexion were both dark, and his
countenance indicative of rather low intelligence, and weak intellectual
powers. The father looked on him as though he was not quite satisfied
with the son who was, probably, to perpetuate his name.
"Are you ready, Edith?" asked the youth.
"Yes," she returned. He approached to give her his arm, and, as they were
passing out, Edith caught her father looking grimly on them, and said
quickly, "Do you mind our going to church, papa? We will stay at home if
you wish."
"No, go along!" said he. "I'll not thwart you in so small a matter, and
hope I may never have occasion to in a greater!" Edith looked up in his
face as he uttered these last words. There was a dark shade flitting over
it. It haunted her all the while she was walking to church; but so many
things occupied her attention, after entering, it passed from her mind.
"I fain would know why woman is outraged,
And trampled in the very dust by man,
Who vaunts himself the lord of all the earth,
And e'en the mighty realms of sea and air."
Winter was passing away, and Wimbledon was making but slow progress
toward the better knowledge of the new family that had come among them.
The silver plate on the hall door announced the master's name as Col. J.
Corydon Malcome, a sounding appellation enough; and he was often seen
walking up and down the streets in his rich, fur-lined overcoat and laced
velvet cap, placed with a courtly air over his cloud of ebon curls. He
was known to be a widower, and the woful extravagancies into which Mary
Madeline Mumbles cajoled her doting mother, were enough to make one
shudder in relating. Wimbledon was ransacked for the gayest taffetas, the
jauntiest bonnets, and broadest Dutch lace, till, at length, poor Mr.
Salsify went to his wife with a doleful countenance, and told her he
could never "rise in his profession" as long as she upheld Madeline in
such whimsical extravagance. Mrs. Salsify looked lofty, and tossed her
carroty head; but her husband had waxed bold in his distress, and could
not be intimidated by ireful brows, or pursed-up lips. So he proceeded to
free his mind on this wise: "As for Mary Madeline's ever catching that
haughty, black-headed Col. Malcome, I know better; she can't do it, and I
would much rather have her marry Theophilus Shaw, who is a steady, modest
shoemaker. He makes good wages, and can maintain a wife comfortably, and
would treat her well; which is more than I would trust that
murderous-looking colonel to do."
"Well, you will have your own way, I suppose," said Mrs. S., putting on
an injured expression. "I see it is about as Mrs. Pimble and the
sisterhood tell me. Men are all a set of tyrants, and the women are their
slaves."
"Come, come, wife!" said Mr. Salsify, impatiently; "pray, don't get any
of those foolish notions in your head. Depend upon it, nothing could so
effectually put a stop to my 'rising in my profession.' The piazza and
second story could never be built, if you neglected your home affairs,
and went cantering about the country, like those evil-spirited women,
turning everything topsy-turvy, and mocking at all law and order; but I
know my wife has a mind too delicate and feminine to commit such bold,
masculine actions."
Mr. Mumbles had chosen the right weapon with which to combat his wife's
inclinations toward the Woman's Rights mania. A love of flattery was her
weak point. It is with half her sex. We too often say, by way of
expressing our disapproval of a certain man, "O, he is a gross
flatterer!" thus very frequently condemning the quality we most admire in
him;--or, if not the one we most admire, at least the one which affords
us most pleasure and gratification when in his society. But to our tale:
On a certain blustering January day, a sleigh, containing two ladies and
a gentleman, drove to the door of Col. Malcome's elegant mansion, and
were ushered into the spacious drawing-room by the blooming-visaged
housekeeper. Col. Malcome arose from the luxurious sofa on which he had
been reclining among a profusion of costly furs, and received his
visitors with an air of courtly magnificence, which might have had the
effect to intimidate a modest, retiring female; but not king Solomon in
all his glory could intimidate or abash Mrs. Judith Justitia Pimble, or
Mrs. Rebecca Potentia Lawson. As for poor, insignificant Peter Pimble, he
looked quite aghast with terror and astonishment at his own temerity in
penetrating to a presence so imposing and sublime, and cuddled away in
the most obscure corner he could find, while his majestic wife assumed a
velvet-cushioned arm-chair, which stood beside a marble table.
"Perhaps you do not know our names?" said Mrs. Pimble, bending a sharp
glance on Col. Malcome from beneath her shaggy brows.
"I certainly have not that pleasure, madam," answered the colonel, with a
graceful bow.
"I do not like that style of address," said Mrs. Lawson, arising from the
ottoman on which she had been sitting, with her broad, white palms
extended to the warmth of the glowing grate, and throwing her stately
form upon a crimson sofa; "it is a fawning, affected, puppyish manner,
which men assume when speaking to women, as if they were not capable of
understanding and appreciating a plain, common-sense mode of address."
"Ah, yes!" said Mrs. Pimble, "man has so long reigned a tyrant of
absolute sway, that centuries will pass, I fear, before he is dethroned,
and woman elevated to her proper stand among the nations of the earth."
Here she tossed her bonnet on the table, smoothed her bushy hair, and,
drawing a red bandanna from her pocket, gave her long nose a vigorous
rub, and settled herself in her soft chair again. Col. Malcome sat bolt
upright among the furs which were piled up around him, and stared at his
visitors. Yes, refined and polite though he was, he forgot his
good-breeding in surprise at the coarse, singular manners of his
involuntary guests. The figure in the extreme corner of the apartment at
length attracted his notice, and placing a chair in proximity to the
fire, he said, "Will you not be seated, sir?"
The muffled shape moved, but the brawny lady in the rocking-chair spoke,
and it was still again.
"O, Pimble can stand, Mr. Malcome," she said, "that's his name, and mine
is Mrs. Judith Justitia Pimble, author of tracts for the amelioration of
enslaved and down-trodden woman; and this is Mrs. Rebecca Potentia
Lawson, my sister and co-operater in the work of reform."
Col. Malcome bowed; but, recollecting the rebuff one brief remark of his
had received, remained silent.
"The object of our visit," said Mrs. Lawson, "is to see and confer with
the ladies of your household."
"Begging your pardon," said the colonel, "my family contains but one
lady."
"Ah, the one we met at the door, then?" remarked Mrs. Pimble.
"No, madam; that was my housekeeper," returned the colonel.
"Well, what do you call _her_?" asked Mrs. Lawson.
"My housekeeper, madam, as I have just informed you."
"She has no other name, I suppose?" said Mrs. Pimble, in a loud, ironical
tone; "she is to you a housekeeper, as a horse is a horse, or a cow a
cow;--not a woman"----
"O, yes! a woman, certainly," interrupted the colonel.
"A woman, but not a lady?" continued Mrs. Pimble.
The gentleman bowed as if he felt himself understood. "Well, sir," said
Mrs. Lawson, peering on him through her green glasses, "will you please
to inform us of the difference between a woman and a lady?"
Col. Malcome, who loved the satirical, had a mind to apply it here, but
his politeness restrained him, and he merely remarked, "In a general
sense, none: in a particular, very great."
"That is, in _your_ opinion," said Mrs. Pimble. "Now let me tell you
there is no difference, whatever. The wide world over, every woman is a
lady--(the colonel hemmed,)--every woman is a lady," repeated Mrs. P.,
"and every lady is a woman."
"That is, in _your_ opinion?" remarked Col. Malcome.
"In every sensible person's opinion."
"Well, sister Justitia," said Mrs. Lawson, drawing forth a massive silver
watch, by a steel fob-chain; "we are wasting time. There's but an hour to
the lecture, and we have several miles to ride. Let us state the object
of our visit in a form suited to this man's comprehension."
The colonel felt rather small, on hearing this depreciation of his
intellectual powers, but said nothing.
"Well, make the statement, sister Potentia," said Mrs. Pimble, folding
her brawny arms over her capacious chest, and giving a loud, masculine
ahem.
"Mr. Malcome, we would like to see the female portion of your household,"
said Mrs. Lawson, in a slow, measured tone, with an emphasis on every
word.
As the colonel, indignant at the coarse vulgarity of the intruders, was
about to reply in the negative--the door opened, and Edith entered,
accompanied by Sylva, who led a small, white Spanish poodle by a silver
cord. The little animal capered gracefully about, cutting all sorts of
cunning antics, much to the amusement of the young girl, till at length
discovering the muffled shape of Pimble behind the door, he ran up to
him, smelt at his clothes, and commenced a furious barking.
"You had better go out doors, Pimble," said his wife; "you are so
contemptible a thing even insignificant curs yelp at your heels."
Mrs. Lawson laughed loudly at this witty speech, and the poor man was
about disappearing outside the door, when Col. Malcome prevented his exit
by bidding him be seated, and ordering Sylva to drive Fido from the room.
Quiet being restored, and Mr. Pimble having ventured to drop tremblingly
on the extreme edge of the chair offered for his comfort and convenience,
Col. Malcome said, "You wished to see the female portion of my
household:--here are two of them; my daughter and her attendant."
"Her attendant!" remarked Mrs. Lawson, "I do not know as I exactly
understand the signification of that term, as applied by you in the
present instance."
"Her waiting-woman, then," answered the colonel, "if that is a plainer
term."
"Ay, yes; her waiting-woman," resumed Mrs. L. "Well, your daughter looks
rather puny and sickly. She needs exercise in the open air, I should
say,--narrow-chested,--comes from a consumptive family on the mother's
side?"
"Madam," said Col. Malcome, with a sudden anger in his tone and manner,
"I don't know as it is any business of yours, from what family my
daughter comes."
"O, no particular business," continued Mrs. Lawson, with undisturbed
equanimity; "I only judged her to come of a consumptive race by her face
and form. Public speaking would be an excellent remedy for her weakly
appearance. That enlarges the lungs, and creates confidence and reliance
on one's own powers. Miss Malcome, would you not like to attend some of
our lectures and reform clubs?"
"I don't know," answered Edith, tremblingly. "I think I would if father
is willing;" and she turned her sweet blue eyes up to his face, as if to
read there her permission or refusal.
"A slave to parental authority, I see," remarked Mrs. Pimble; "but this
lady, grown to years of maturity; she, surely, should have a mind of her
own. Don't you think woman is made a galley-slave by the tyrant man?" she
demanded, turning her discourse on Sylva, who looked confused, as if she
did not quite understand the speech addressed to her. At length, she
asked timidly, "What woman do you refer to, madam?" "To all women upon
the face of the earth!" returned Mrs. Pimble, vehemently. "Are they not
loaded with chains and fetters, and crushed down in filthy mire and dirt
by self-inflated, tyrannizing man?"
"O, no!" answered Sylva, innocently; "no man ever put a chain on me, or
on any woman of my acquaintance, or ever pushed one down in the dirt."
"Poor fool!" exclaimed Mrs. Pimble, with great indignation; "you are
grovelling in the mire of ignorance, and man's foot is on your neck to
hold you there."
The figure that trembled on the edge of the chair was now heard calling
faintly, "Mrs. Pimble--Mrs. Pimble."
"Pimble speaks, sister Justitia," said Mrs. Lawson.
"What do you want?" asked the lady, turning sharply round.
"'Tis four o'clock, ma'am," gasped he.
"Four o'clock! didn't I tell you I wished to be at the lecture-room at
that hour?"
"I didn't like to interrupt you," he answered feebly.
"What a fool of a man!" exclaimed the enraged wife. "Bring the sleigh to
the door, instanter;" and Pimble rushed out, the ladies following close
on his heels, vociferating at the top of their voices, without even a
parting salutation to the family they had been visiting.
"It is a hermit.
Well, methinks I've read
In romance tales of such strange beings oft;
But surely ne'er did think these eyes should see
The living, breathing, walking counterpart.
Canst tell me where he dwells?
Far in the woods,
In a lone hut, apart from all his kind."
The pale moonbeams peeped through the rents and crevices of Dilly
Danforth's wretched abode, as the poor woman sat on the hearth with
Willie's head lying in her lap, while he read by the flickering
fire-light from the pages of a well-worn Bible. The little fellow had
never fully recovered from that long, painful illness that had nearly
cost him his life, and from which it is very possible he would never
have arisen but for those little bundles of firewood that were so
providentially laid on poor Dilly's threshold, by some charitable, though
unknown, hand. They still continued to be placed there, and it was well
they were so, for Mrs. Danforth's health had failed so much she was not
able to perform half her former amount of labor; and had it not been for
these small armfuls of fuel, which very much resembled those Willie used
to collect, the washerwoman and her boy must have perished during the
long, cold winter season. Yes, perished in the very midst of Wimbledon;
within a stone's throw of many a well-filled woodyard, and under the nose
of a Mrs. Pimble's philanthropic efforts for the amelioration of her
species. Dilly's neglect on the part of the many arose, not so much from
inhumanity and covetousness, as from a wrong bias, which a few words had
created in the people's minds. A report had passed through the village,
several months before, purporting to come from a reliable source, which
represented Mrs. Danforth as not so poor as she appeared; that she
assumed her poverty-stricken garb and appearance to excite sympathy, and
thus swindle, in a small way, from the purses of her wealthy neighbors.
There is nothing of which people have a greater horror than of being
humbugged, if they know it; so, for the most part, the Wimbledonians
turned a deaf ear and cold shoulder on the washerwoman's sorrowful
supplications for charity. Little Edith Malcome pitied the pale, sad face
that appeared at the kitchen door every Monday morning, and always asked
her father's permission to give her a basket of victuals to carry home,
which were always received with many grateful expressions by the poor
woman.
Edith sat by the drawing-room window, one bleak, stormy winter morning,
watching the snow as it fell silently to the earth, when a man of
singular appearance, walking slowly along the opposite side of the
street, attracted her notice.
"O, father!" exclaimed she quickly, "come here; the oddest-looking man is
going past."
Col. Malcome rose from his seat by the fire and approached the window.
"What a disgusting appearance he presents!" said he, gazing on the
slowly-receding figure. "It angers me to see a man degrade himself by
such uncouth apparel."
"O, not disgusting! is he, father?" said Edith, "only odd and droll; and
his face looked so pale and mild, I thought it really pretty. If he only
wouldn't wear that short-waisted, long-tailed coat, with those funny
little capes on the shoulders, and leave off that great tall-crowned hat
with its broad, slouching brim, and have a little cane instead of that
long pole he carries in his hand, he would be quite a pretty man,--don't
you think so, father?"
"Well, really I don't know how he might look were he thus transformed,"
answered Col. Malcome. "I only expressed my opinion of his present
appearance."
"Don't you know who he is?" asked Edith.
"No," said her father, returning to his seat.
"Well, I wish you would try and learn his name," pursued the fair girl.
"What for?" asked Col. M., resuming the perusal of the volume he had left
to obey her summons to the window.
"Because I would like to know it," returned she. "I fancy he is some
relation of that pale Dilly Danforth's, for he has just such mournful
eyes."
"I do not wish to see them then," said her father, with some impatience
of manner, "for I don't like the expression of that woman's eyes."
"They are very sad," said Edith, "but sorrow has made them so. I think
they were once very beautiful. But won't you learn this strange man's
name? Perhaps he is very poor, and we could alleviate his wants by kind
charities."
"No," answered Col. M. in a tone which dismissed the subject; "I cannot
run about the country to hunt up old stragglers for you to bestow alms
upon."
Edith looked on her father's stern brow, and, feeling it was useless to
urge her plea any longer, stole away to her own apartment, where she
found Sylva engaged in feeding her canaries and furnishing them with
fresh water. The little bright creatures were singing sweetly, but Edith
did not heed their songs. She stood apart by a window, and gazed out on
the falling snowflakes. At length she saw Rufus enter the yard, and soon
heard him ascending the stairs. "Where have you been, brother?" she
asked, as he came in, his face reddened by exposure to the cold, biting
atmosphere.
"Down on the river, skating with some of the village boys," answered he,
drawing a chair close to the glowing fire; "and O, such a fine time as we
had! I shall be glad when we go to school, Edith; it will be so much more
lively and pleasant."
"I shall be glad when the snow is gone, so I can run out doors, and sow
my flower-beds," returned Edith, thoughtfully. Then she sat gazing in the
fire a long time, as was always her wont when thinking deeply on any
subject. Sylva had finished her care of the birds, and brought forth Fido
from his little cot-bed in her room. He sprang into Edith's lap, then
into Rufus', kissing their cheeks and evincing his joy at beholding them
in various pleasing, expressive ways. But Edith pushed him away and told
Sylva to put him to bed again. So the brisk little fellow was carried
off, looking very sorry, and wailing piteously, as if he pleaded
permission to remain by the warm fire.
Rufus was younger than his sister, and of an intelligence and refinement
so far below hers, that she seldom evinced much pleasure or enjoyment in
his society, but she looked towards him now with an eager expression of
interest, as he said,
"O, Edith, I saw the funniest man this morning!"
"Where?" she asked quickly.
"Down by the side of the river among a clump of brushwood, gathering
little bundles of sticks. Charlie Seaton and I spoke to him, but he did
not answer us."
"Did he wear a long overcoat with small capes on the shoulders, and a
slouching-brimmed hat?" inquired Edith earnestly.
"Yes," said Rufus. "Have you seen him, then?"
"Passing along in the street," returned she. "Did Charlie know his name?"
"No; but he said it was a man who lived alone in a small hut, far off in
the forest, made of the boughs and branches of cedar trees, curiously
twisted together; and he is thence styled the _Hermit of the Cedars_."
"A hermit!" exclaimed Edith. "I have read of such beings in old books,
but I never supposed they really existed, or at least never expected I
should see one with my own eyes. I shall like this place better than
ever, now; it will be so romantic to have a hermit in our vicinity. What
do you suppose he was going to do with his bundles of sticks, Rufus?"
"Use them for firewood, probably," said he.
"But I should have thought he might have obtained that in the forest
where he lives, and not been obliged to travel all the way down here,
this stormy day, to pick up wood from among the snow, and then carry it
two or three miles in his arms," said Edith, in a ruminating tone.
"O, hermits are strange beings, sis!" answered Rufus, whistling a vacant
tune as he stood before the window gazing forth on the dismal storm which
debarred him from his accustomed diversion of skating on the frozen
surface of the river.
While his children were occupied with the preceding conversation, Col.
Malcome had donned his fur-lined overcoat and stepped across the yard to
Deacon Allen's cottage. The good people were quite embarrassed to behold
so smart a visitor in their unostentatious little parlor, but the
colonel, by his gentlemanly grace, soon placed them at their ease. After
a few moments' conversation on general topics, he asked, casually enough,
who was the owner of the fine mansion he had noticed in his rambles about
town, with the appellation "Summer Home" sculptured on its marble
gateway?
"O, that is Major Tom Howard's!" answered Deacon Allen. "His family have
made it their abode for six or eight months every season since they owned
it; and I understand, after their next return, it is to become their
permanent residence."
"'Tis a delightful location," remarked Colonel M.; "a very large mansion.
Has Mr. Howard a family corresponding with its dimensions?"
"O, no, only a wife and one child--a beautiful girl."
"How old is his daughter?" inquired the colonel.
"Well, about fourteen I should say; but seems much older from her matured
growth and manners."
"Has Mr. Howard no sister living with him?" asked the visitor,
carelessly.
"No," answered the deacon.
"And has he not lost one?"
"Not since he came among us; though his wife, I have understood, always
dresses in black. She is a confirmed invalid and seldom seen."
"Then the family do not mingle much in society?" said the colonel.
The deacon shook his head.
"Somewhat aristocratic, probably," remarked the visitor.
"I should judge so," said the deacon. "They don't send Florence to
school, but keep three tutors for her at home. She is very accomplished,
but rather wilful and proud, they say."
"The effect of over-indulgence, perhaps," said the colonel, rising.
"Will you not honor us with another call?" asked Mrs. Allen.
"With pleasure," answered he, bowing a graceful good-morning to his
delighted entertainers.
"A vestal priestess, proudly pure
But of a meek and quiet spirit;
With soul all dauntless to endure
And mood so calm that naught can stir it,
Save when a thought most deeply thrilling
Her eyes with gentlest tears is filling,
Which seem with her true words to start
From the deep fountain of her heart."
The fine parlors of Mr. Leroy Edson's tasteful mansion were brilliantly
illuminated. Warm fires glowed in the shining marble grates. Dim argand
lamps bathed in soft light the rich furniture, carved cornices, and rare
statuary which decorated the mantels. The elite of Wimbledon were
assembling, and young Mrs. Edson moved lightly to and fro, receiving her
numerous guests with graceful self-possession, and welcoming them to her
home and heart with warm, earnest cordiality. They were nearly all
strangers to her, as she had been but a few months installed mistress of
Mr. Edson's splendid mansion; but she felt they were the people among
whom she was henceforth to live and find her associates and friends. She
had made one call, only, since her arrival in Wimbledon, and that on Col.
Malcome's family, who were later comers than herself.
Louise Edson was graceful, brilliant, beautiful. O, what a wealth of
thought and intellect was hers; what a broad, generous nature; what
lightning-like perceptions, quick, far-seeing judgment, sparkling humor
and sarcastic wit! She floated in a sea of exuberant life and beauty,
which was fed continually from the exhaustless fountains of her own
thought-wealthy soul. Her calm, clear eyes mirrored the bright fancies
that flitted through her brain. The chestnut hair, brushed away from the
youthful brow, revealed the tiny blue veins on the white expanding
temples; while the high, straight nose and curved nostrils, with the
sweet little mouth and tapering chin that smiled below, made up a face
whose regular features were its least claim to beauty. It was the soul
within which shone over these features and lighted them at times with
supernatural loveliness. And was this brilliant being understood and
appreciated by the man who had won her for his bride? Faugh!--we blush at
our own stupidity in asking the question. Are such lofty souls ever
appreciated by even one of the swarming masses that people the earth with
their corporeal bodies? Let those answer who can.
But Louise, soaring as was her nature, was yet cursed with that weakness
which too often possesses souls like hers, swaying e'en a more tyrant
sceptre than in meaner breasts, as though in envious hate of those
sky-aspiring pinions, and a demon wish to make them lick the dust. She
was an orphan, with no relative save a maiden aunt, with whom she dwelt.
She felt alone in the wide world, and she wanted--O, pity her, reader, if
you can!--she wanted somebody to lean on, somebody to look up to. Could
she not lean on her own strong intellect, and look up to the stars?--or
could she not breathe forth her rich-laden soul in lofty song and
romance, and lean upon the pillars of a world-wide fame? No, O, no! With
all her strength of soul and intellect, she had weak woman's heart. She
must love and be loved; and when the wealthy Mr. Leroy Edson knelt, an
enamored knight, at the shrine of her youth and beauty, she gave him her
hand. He thought he had done a most generous deed in thus raising a poor,
lone orphan girl from comparative obscurity to a position among the
highest circles of society. Her superior education and gem-freighted soul
were all the fortune she brought him; a fortune greater than the
treasures of Ind., but of whose princely value he had not the power to
form the most distant estimate. To behold her tall, graceful figure
flitting through his elegant mansion, performing some light household
duty, receiving her guests or chatting and singing gayly through the long
evenings, was, to him, life's whole of happiness. And was Louise
altogether content with the man of her choice? No, or she had not
gathered Wimbledon about her to make merry the midnight hour. People do
not give fetes to display their happiness. They give them too often to
relieve a tedious monotony, to silence a gnawing discontent, and forget
for the moment in hilarious excitement some uneasy foreboding of evil to
come, or disquieting conviction that all, even now, is not as it should
be.
Louise had not been many weeks Mrs. Edson, before she discovered the man
she had taken for "better or worse" till death should separate them, was
no helpmeet for her. They had not a thought or sympathy in common. He
hired servants to execute her commands; bought her fine clothes, and fine
books too, when he found these latter most delighted her; but he never
wished to hear her read from them, and invariably yawned if she spoke of
literary subjects. He was good-natured and fond of display, with a fair
estimate of his own importance and standing in society. He regarded
himself as one of the pillars of Wimbledon's wealth and
prosperity;--remove him, and the whole structure would tremble and
perhaps go down with a crash to rise no more. It took but a brief time
for Louise to read her husband's soul through and through; and with her
sharp, critical nature, that could not understand and would not overlook
faults and follies to which her bosom was a stranger, she decided she had
_married a fool_. What was to be done? The act was voluntary on her
part. True, a longer acquaintance between the parties might have led to
a different result, but it was too late to think of that now. And this
was the end of all her heart-longings for some one to love and
reverence, to lean on and look up to! O, how intense was her agony! All
her fine feelings wasted, her soul's wealth poured idly forth, and her
rich life in its blooming years given to one who could not understand
one of her lofty dreams or soaring aspirations. A falcon with sun-daring
eyes tied to a grovelling buzzard! Was't not a hard fate, reader? Pity
her, all ye who can,--pity her a great deal; mourn over her cruel wreck
of happiness; and if in future years the warm, impassioned nature,
goaded by its own unuttered pangs, driven wild by its rayless, hopeless
desolation, is guilty of some irregularities, some acts which virtue and
propriety can hardly sanction, O, remember her early sufferings, and be
merciful!
Mr. Edson's party passed off pleasantly. All seemed delighted with their
entertainment. The lord of the mansion was in great good-humor, and his
beautiful wife the star of the evening. In a simple robe of dark blue
cashmere, which fastened low over her white, sloping shoulders, and
fitted closely her slender waist, while the ample folds swept the rich
tapestry carpets, she moved among her guests like the embodiment of a
graceful thought. Her luxuriant brown hair was gathered in bands at the
back of her head; a massive chain and cross of gold ornamented her
swan-like neck, and bands of the same material clasped her round, white
arms. Small wonder that Mr. Edson should feel proud of his wife. The
whole evening she was the centre of a delighted group. All flocked around
to hear her brilliant conversation and gaze on her animated, expressive
features. Col. Malcome and the gentle Edith engaged a large share of her
attention and regard. The young girl was insensibly attracted by the
affectionate interest evinced in her manner, and the sweet voice and
beaming smile with which she addressed her. Col. Malcome expressed his
admiration of the exquisite taste displayed in the furnishing of her
parlors.
"I cannot tell you, Mrs. Edson," said he, "what I most admire in your
elegant drawing-rooms. They are one harmonious whole; but if you were
removed, I think I would very soon discover what was wanting to render
them complete."
"Now," said Louise, "let me tell you at the commencement of our
acquaintance, which I hope for my humble sake may continue to be
cultivated, that I detest flattery of all things;" and she turned a
smiling glance on him, as these piquant words fell from her pretty, red
lips, rendered more than usually charming by the slight sarcastic curl
she gave them.
"So do I," returned he; "but truth is not flattery."
"In the language of the poet," said she, laughing, "I will not seek to
cope with you in compliment. Do you know I feel a lively interest in your
beautiful daughter?"
"I am gratified to know it," said he, glancing on the bright creature at
his side with an expressive glance. "Edith is a timid little thing; she
would improve under your accomplished tuition. Not that I have the
presumption to ask for her your care and instructions beyond what she
might receive by a neighborly interchange of visits."
"O, say she may spend a portion of every week with me, when spring opens
and the earth is divested of its garb of snow!" said Louise, in a tone of
affectionate eagerness. "You cannot tell how her innocent gayety would
lighten many of my weary hours."
Col. Malcome started as he heard these words, and turned a searching
glance upon her. A slight blush suffused her cheek for a moment, but she
soon regained her self-possession. It was one of her faults to give too
free, unrestrained expression to her thoughts. They came welling up to
her lips, and escaped ere she was aware.
For several moments he continued to gaze on her, and there was something
in his countenance that instantly revealed to her quick eye that he had
not only believed in the weariness she had so thoughtlessly expressed,
but had also fathomed its cause. She felt displeased and irritated at her
own want of caution and what she silently termed his presumption.
"Why do you look on me so strangely?" she asked at length.
"I beg your pardon, madam," said he, suddenly averting his gaze.
"Which I shall not give," returned she, with a slight, dignified movement
of her queenly head, "unless you tell me what you think of me."
"_All_ I think of you, Mrs. Edson," said he, turning his face again
toward hers, "perhaps would not please you to know."
"Yes, all," said Louise, "I will know all."
"Well, this is not the time or place for the disclosure," answered he.
She looked at him sharply as he pronounced these words. He smiled and
added, "I should be monopolizing the time which belongs to your company."
"Ay, yes!" said she, "your words recall the duty I owe to my
condescending guests;" and, bowing, she glided away and joined a company
that surrounded the piano.
"You play, of course, Mrs. Edson," said a portly man with a benevolent
countenance.
"Occasionally, though I have rather a dull ear," she answered, assuming
the music-stool. Several light songs were performed with fine taste and
skill, and received the warmest encomiums of her listeners. Another and
another was called for, till at length she arose and said, "There are
doubtless others here who play far better than myself. I have led the
way, let them follow."
Col. Malcome arose from a sofa near by, on which he had thrown himself to
listen to the fair musician, and assumed the seat she had vacated. A few
prolonged notes, and then one of the most beautiful and intricate
compositions of Beethoven, poured its sonorous strains on the ears of the
assembly. The performer at length seemed to forget all around him, and at
the end of the second chorus joined his own deep, rich tones with the
instrument. All were delighted; but Louise, with her quick sensibilities,
was thrilled to the centre of her soul. And she felt piqued and angry
too; not that he had excelled her, for she was above such small envy,
but----she could not tell why.
The party dispersed, and she found herself again in the solitude of her
own apartment. That swelling chorus rolled through her midnight dreams,
and echoed in her ears for many a day, as she superintended her domestic
affairs, or sat down to the perusal of some treasured volume.
"I tell thee, husband, 'tis a goodly thing,
To get a daughter married off your hands,
And know she's found an easy-tempered mate;
For many men there be in this rude world.
Who do most shockingly abuse their wives;
But of their number is not this mild youth
Who takes our daughter for his wedded bride."
Young Mrs. Edson's party was a three days' wonder. Mrs. Salsify Mumbles,
inasmuch as she was excluded from being one of the guests, availed
herself of the next choicest privilege, and learned, as far as she was
able, the dresses and conversation of those in attendance; and how Mrs.
E. comported herself, and what she cooked for supper. She was shocked to
learn the young wife wore a low-necked dress, and set her down at once as
a low, vulgar woman, in whose company she should consider it a disgrace
to be seen. Mrs. Pimble said another milk-sop had come among them to fawn
and giggle in the face of the oppressor, man.
The Edson fete seemed to pave the way for others, and the winter season
passed gayly and pleasantly among the wealthier classes of Wimbledon.
Col. Malcome, his daughter, and Rufus, were present at all the social
gatherings; and, in fact, the colonel's was getting to be a familiar and
welcome face at almost every door in the village. He even called on Mrs.
Salsify Mumbles, one day, and addressed several civil speeches to the
interesting Mary Madeline, who blushed crimson beneath the glance of his
_unresistible_ eyes, as she termed them, and trembled like an aspen, in
her red silk gown. We do not know that we have ever spoken of the
personal charms of this blooming young lady, and we will now attempt a
brief daguerreotype for the reader's enlightenment and edification.
Her hair was of that peculiarly brilliant color noticed in that
delightful esculent vegetable, the carrot, when boiled and prepared for
table. She wore it twisted in a hard, horny knob at the top of her head,
which strained her blue-green eyes, and gave them the expression of those
of a choked grimalkin. Her nose turned divinely upwards; her blubber lips
turned downwards with a grievous, watery expression. Her cheeks were red;
so was her nose; so were her eyes at times, when the horny knob took a
harder twist than usual. She had small, hairy ears, ornamented with
enormous jewels. Her neck was short, and three stubborn warts, of the
size of peas, stuck to its left side. Her waist might have been admired
in the fifteenth century; but it was some nine inches too short by as
many too broad, to elicit the admiration of the gallants of the present
age, who rave, and go distracted about gossamer divinities scarcely six
inches in circumference. She was about four feet four in stature, and her
foot would have crushed Cinderella, and used her slipper for a thumb-cot.
Such was Mary Madeline Mumbles in her eighteenth year, and never was
child more like parent, than was this young lady like her doting,
affectionate mamma.
We have been at considerable trouble to sketch Miss Mumbles at full
length, that the reader may be able to form a correct idea of her
appearance when she steps forth in full glory of silken bridal attire, on
the arm of Mr. Theophilus Shaw, the promising young shoe-cobbler, upon
whom Mr. Salsify had long since set his heart, as the proper man to
become his future son-in-law. And Miss Mary, who lost her passion for
Dick Giblet, after he shut the watch-dog in the kitchen-pantry,--a trick
which had nearly cost her the loss of a beloved mother,--and finding she
could not captivate the handsome Colonel Malcome with checkered aprons
and broad lace, began, like a dutiful child, to receive the advances of
the mild Theophilus more graciously, and had, after much maidenly
confusion, consented to become his wife, when, as we have seen, the
uncompromising colonel called, and distracted her with fear lest she had
been too precipitate in accepting Theophilus, when a higher prize might
be on the point of falling into her arms. But her apprehensions were
banished after a while, as the colonel did not appear a second time, and
the marriage was finally consummated; and Mary Madeline Mumbles became in
due form Mrs. Theophilus Shaw. Jenny Andrews and Amy Seaton officiated as
bridesmaids, and a large party were invited to make merry on the
occasion.
The bride's apparel was magnificent; so was the bridegroom's. We would
attempt to describe it in detail, but dare not, knowing well we should
fail to do it justice. Mrs. Salsify had the wicks of her parlor lamps
full half an inch in length, and never seemed to notice how swiftly the
camphene was disappearing, so elate was she with the prospect of marrying
her beautiful daughter.
The happy couple were to make a short bridal excursion, and then return
and dwell under the bride's parental roof for the present; Mrs. Salsify
having vacated her bed-room, which the young people were going to use for
kitchen, parlor, and shoemaker's shop. And a little pasteboard sign with
the words, "Theophilus Shaw, Boot & Shoe Maker," scrawled on it with
lampblack, in an awkward, school-boy hand, was suspended by a string from
the bed-room window.
"I am glad to have Mary Madeline settled in life," said Mrs. Mumbles,
after the arrangements were all complete; "and the matter off my mind."
"So am I," answered her husband; "and I am glad she has made so good a
match, too. Mr. Shaw will make a much better husband than Dick Giblet, or
that black-headed Col. Malcome."
"O, a better one than that scapegrace of a Dick, of course!" said Mrs.
Salsify, quickly; "but as to a better one than the colonel, I don't know
about that. The advantages of his position are very great. Maddie would
have been the tip-top of Wimbledon if she had married him."
"So she will be now, in time," returned Mr. S., confidently, "for I am
'rising rapidly in my profession.' Next summer I shall build the piazza
and second story, and in ten years I'd like to see the man that can hold
his head above Mr. Salsify Mumbles."
At these hopeful words, the wife fondly embraced her husband, and the
loving couple fell to forming plans and projects for their brilliant
future.
And yet this wild woods' man was happy once,--
Bright fame did offer him her richest dower,
But disappointment blasted all his hopes,
And crushed him 'neath her desolating power.
Cold and bleak roared the fierce wintry blasts through the broad, dense
forest that stretched away to the north of Wimbledon. The stars sparkled
with unwonted brilliancy over the clear blue firmament, as a quick step
crackled along the narrow, icy path, and a dark form was seen hurrying
toward a faint light that gleamed dimly through a dense clump of cedars.
Then there was a sound as of bars withdrawn, and a bright, blazing hearth
was revealed for a moment as the dark form entered, when all was hushed
and silent again, save the dismal roar of the night wind through the
surrounding pines.
"You are late to-night, uncle," said a tall, dark-haired youth, as he
undid the fastenings of the wanderer's long overcoat, and removed his
woollen mittens and wide-brimmed hat.
"What time do you conceive it to be?" asked the man, depositing his long
staff in a corner, and approaching the glowing fire.
"Past midnight, I would suppose," answered the boy, piling up a quantity
of books that were scattered over a small table, and with which he had
been occupying himself through the long evening hours.
"O, not so late as that!" returned the man, drawing a rude chair before
the fire and extending his small, thin hands to the grateful blaze. "The
village clock in the old church tower at Wimbledon was on the stroke of
ten when I laid my bundle of sticks in their accustomed place, and set my
face homewards. I must have travelled at a laggard pace, if it is already
midnight. Are you lonesome when I'm away, Edgar?" inquired he, turning
his deep, melancholy eyes on the fair, open countenance of the youth.
"Sometimes I am," returned he; "I have been so to-night. A strange power
seemed to possess my thoughts, to lead them through most hideous scenes,
and dark, awful glooms and shadows enveloped my soul in mazes of doubt
and fear."
"What a nervous boy you are!" said the man, "come and sit beside me, and
I'll tell you of a project I've been revolving in my mind these several
days." Edgar did as requested, and after a brief silence the hermit
commenced:
"These six months, my lad, you have dwelt in this little hut in the
forest, holding intercourse with no human being save myself. It is not
right your boyhood and youth should pass in this manner. I have been
selfish in keeping you all to myself, to cheer my solitude. 'Twas your
parents' dying wish that you should receive all the advantages of
education and travel. Your life has been, for the most part, spent in the
toil of study, and I knew you needed an interval of relaxation and
retirement to reinvigorate your mental and physical energies. So I
brought you to share the seclusion of my hermitage for a while. Grateful
as has been your presence to me, I should wrong you, and forfeit the
promise given your parents on their deathbeds, if I encouraged or
permitted this retirement for a longer period than is necessary for your
restoration to health and vigor. You know I am your guardian, Edgar. The
fortune left for you by your father was entrusted to my care till you
should attain a suitable age to have it transferred to your own hands,
and ample provisions were made for your education and instruction in the
painter's art. Do you see what I am coming at, Edgar?" he added, pausing
in his discourse, and directing his gaze toward the boy, who sat
listening attentively to his uncle's words.
"No, Uncle Ralph," answered the lad; "I don't know as I do, unless you
are going to send me away from you to some distant school;" and his voice
trembled as he spoke.
"Would you dislike to leave me, my boy?" said the hermit, a tear dropping
from his melancholy eye.
"Ah, that would I!" returned Edgar, "for I have none to care for me in
the wide world, save you."
"Pshaw, pshaw, boy! don't prate in that way, with your bright, curly
locks," said the man, laying his thin hand softly on the youth's light,
clustering hair. "When these locks are gray, and you have toiled and
labored for fame and honors never gained, or that burned and furrowed the
brow that wore them; when you have engaged in the world's weary strife
and sunk by the wayside worn and disheartened by the contest; when
friends have proved false;"--here the hermit's voice grew deeper and more
vehement--"and when those who professed for you the fondest love turn
coldly away to mock and scorn at your deep devotion, then, then, my boy,
you will exclaim in bitterness, 'there are none to care for me!'"
He paused, and bowed his face on his hands. Edgar longed to comfort him,
but knew not what to say.
The night wind roared solemnly without, the fire burned low on the rude
hearth, and the little apartment, but illy protected from the searching
blasts, grew chilly. Still the hermit sat silent, his bowed head resting
between his small, attenuated hands. Edgar rose, brought the long
overcoat and spread it over his shoulders, as a protection from the
increasing cold. Then wrapping a blanket around his own light form, he
stole softly to the window, and turned his gaze upward to the
star-lighted heaven. He dearly loved to sit thus through the hushed
midnight hours, and listen to the deep, heavy roaring of the mighty
winds, as they swept through the surrounding forest, while his soul
seemed borne away on their rushing currents, up and upward till her
pinions brushed the starry palaces of angels and beatified spirits; and
on, and on, with new splendors ever bursting on her ravished vision, till
the elysium of light in the high heaven of heavens poured its bewildering
glories upon her, and her weary wings fluttered to rest at last upon the
bosom of the All-Holy.
Edgar was possessed of a temperament of the most imaginative order,
deeply imbued with lofty, poetic sentiment, and a tendency to reserve and
melancholy. His father had been an artist, and the sunny skies of Italy
cast their bright glory over his tender years, warming to impassioned
ardor the springs and fountains of his youthful bosom. Very few boys of
his age and acquirements could have endured the seclusion in which he had
dwelt for the last six months; but nothing could have been more consonant
with the reserved, romantic disposition of Edgar; and the prospect of
leaving the wild hut in the forest to go forth among the wide world's
jostling crowds, caused him heart-throbbing pangs.
After a long silence the hermit roused himself. The room was cold and
dark.
"Edgar?" said he, in a low, broken voice.
"I am here," answered the youth, rising, and feeling his way through the
darkness to his uncle's side, "Won't you lie down now? The room is so
cold, and there is no wood within to replenish the fire."
"Yes, my boy, I will lie down," said the hermit, "but not to sleep; the
ghosts of past joys are with me to-night."
"Drive them away, uncle!" said the lad soothingly. "I am not disposed to
sleep either. Let us lie down and cover us warm, and then you tell me of
your plans and projects for my future, as you had commenced to do a few
hours ago."
"No, Edgar, not to-night," answered the recluse. "Your young eyes will
wax heavy with these midnight vigils. You must sleep, my boy, and
to-morrow I will communicate my plans concerning you."
"As you say, uncle," returned Edgar, preparing to lie down.
Young, and happily ignorant of the cares and sorrows that distract the
bosoms of maturer years, he was soon asleep.
The hermit moved to the window, and, after gazing forth some time in
silence, murmured, "Wild, wild is the night! Heaven send she does not
suffer. I left two bundles on her lonely sill, though my fingers grew
stiff with cold ere I had gathered them. Thus do I feebly endeavor to
atone for past misconduct. How the wind roars through the pines! O, what
memories of long ago rush o'er my soul! I think of Mary as the time
approaches when she will be near me. Shall I see her face again? God
forbid!" exclaimed he, stamping his foot violently upon the stone floor.
After a while he resumed his low soliloquy. "I fear for Edgar," he said,
"lest the cold world chill his heart and undo his usefulness, as it has
mine. He has my temperament, reserved, sensitive, and with the same
accursed capacity for strong, undying attachment. What a fair prospect of
fame had I! What honors were ready to crown me when that monster came and
blasted them all! Such do I fear will be Edgar's fate. But he must go
forth into the world; such was the wish of his parents. I can keep him
near me a few months longer by sending him to the Wimbledon seminary, ere
he must depart for some distant university or school of art. Then the
great world will have opened before him, and I shall see him no more."
The hermit suddenly ceased. Tears choked his utterance.
"Uncle!" said Edgar, starting quickly from his slumbers, "will you not
come and lie down?"
"Yes, my boy," answered the sorrowing man, approaching the rude couch.
The wintry winds wailed on with piteous, mournful voices; but the
_Hermit of the Cedars_ slept at last,
"A troubled, dreamy sleep."
"Lawyers and doctors at your service.
We are better off
Without them.
True, you are,--but still
You follow on their heels, and fawn,
And flatter in their faces. If you
Would leave your brawls and fights which
Call for physic, very soon you'd be
Beyond their greedy clutches."
Reader, do you wonder where's the doctor whose saddle-bags may be
supposed to contain the divers specifics for the "ills" which the "flesh"
of Wimbledon is liable to become heir to? He doth exist, and, when
occasion calls, we'll trot him forth.
And do you say this same Wimbledon has never a lawyer within its
precincts,--and whoever heard of a village of several hundred inhabitants
without at least half-a-dozen of these learned disciples of Blackstone to
settle its wrongs and right its abuses?
Permit us to inform you, friend, that we consider lawyers dangerous
animals; and the less men and women have to do with them, the better!
Nevertheless, there is one o' the craft in Wimbledon; and, if you had not
been blind as a bat, you would have discovered, ere this, the sign of
"Peter Paul Pimble, Esq., Attorney-at-Law," hung over the door of a
small, black building in Mudget square. True, Mr. Pimble don't practise
his profession much, for a very good reason; nobody is in want of his
services; and that's the case with two thirds of the lawyers in
Christendom.
Mrs. Pimble has converted her husband's office into a committee-room, and
receptacle for hoards of pamphlets and papers, containing the proceedings
of divers conventions held for the advancement of the cause of "Woman's
Rights, and promulgation of Universal Freedom and Philanthropy."
Mrs. Pimble, the ardent reformist, is at present detained from her labors
by the illness of her eldest son, Garrison. She has sent for the young
female physician, Dr. Sarah Simcoe; but the word is, "pressing business
detains that medical functionary at home,"--so, in direct violation of
her established principles, she has been compelled to send for old Dr.
Potipher, who considers himself, par excellence, the Esculapius of
Wimbledon.
But Peggy Nonce comes blowing back from her hasty errand, and says the
doctor is down to Mr. Moses Simcoe's. Mrs. Pimble wonders what should
take a vile male practitioner to the house of an accomplished
lady-physician. Peggy looks wise, as much as to say she could explain the
mystery if she chose. But no one asks her to speak, so she goes into the
kitchen, where Mr. Pimble sits in his dressing-gown and sheepskin
slippers, shivering over an expiring fire. He lifts his head, as the
bustling housekeeper begins to rattle the covers of the stove for the
purpose of putting in some more wood, and asks feebly if "Dr. Potipher
has arrived."
"No," answers Peggy. "He is down to Mr. Simcoe's."
"Who is sick there?" inquires Mr. Pimble.
"His wife."
"Why, she is a doctor herself! Can't she cure her own ailments?" says Mr.
Pimble.
"Not always, I reckon," is Peggy's reply, while she is evidently vastly
amused by something she does not choose to communicate at present.
Beside the bed of her sick boy stood Mrs. Pimble. She laid her hand on
his forehead. It burned with fever, and his pulse was quick and hard. She
was not much skilled in the "art medical," but she resolved to do
_something_ for her child, and forthwith proceeded to the kitchen and
compounded a dish of catnip leaves and ginger. It exhaled a savory
smell, and she felt quite confident it would cool off Garrison's fever.
Placing a large bowl of the liquid by his bed-side, she bade him drink
freely of it through the evening, while she was gone to the Reform Club,
and when she came home she would call at Sister Simcoe's and obtain a
prescription for him. The sick lad promised to do as she requested. His
fever inclined him to drink incessantly, and ere his mother was ten
yards from the house, he had guzzled the whole brimming bowlful. And
still he called for drink, drink; which his insensate father carried to
him in copious quantities as often as he desired it.
Mrs. Pimble proceeded on her way to the club room. For some reason there
was but a thin attendance. None of the prominent members were present,
and the little company decided to adjourn. Mrs. Pimble hurried round to
Mrs. Simcoe's, to learn the cause of her absence and get the prescription
for Garrison. The lady-doctor had been lecturing for several months in
different towns of the county, and was but recently returned.
Mrs. Pimble entered without knocking, as was her wont, and walked into
the young doctor's office, where she beheld, not the fair, feminine face
of the rightful proprietor, but the ugly, rhubarb-colored visage of the
village apothecary, Dr. Potipher, ensconced in the high-backed cushioned
chair, fast asleep.
She turned back and opened the sitting-room door, and there stood Mr.
Simcoe before a bed, holding a tea-tray, containing several vials and
glasses. Mrs. Pimble started on seeing the night-capped head of Mrs.
Simcoe raised feebly from the pillow, and darting forward, exclaimed,
"Mercy, Sister Simcoe! what has befallen you?"
A smothered wail from beneath the bed-clothes now met her ear, and,
turning down the blankets, she discovered two red-faced, bald-headed
babies, wrapped in swaddling-clothes. She started back aghast.
"What are those things--what are those things?" she demanded,
hysterically, pointing to the infant strangers.
"Simcoe's children!" groaned the pale lady-doctor, turning uneasily away
from the little things that lay squirming and making such grimaces, as
only very young babies _can_ make, in the face of Mrs. Pimble. The
alleged father stood there, chuckling over the smartness of his progeny.
Mrs. Pimble darted one withering glance upon him, and walked away
without another word. She roused old Dr. Potipher, and took him home
with her. Well she did so, for Garrison was much worse than when she
left him, and the doctor pronounced it a case of brain fever, which
would require the nicest care and nursing.
Thus a wet blanket was most audaciously thrown upon the Woman's Rights'
Reform, which was fain to arrest its progress in Wimbledon for a while.
We shall see how long.
"Thy hands are filled with early flowers,
Thy step is on the wind;
The innocent and keen delight
Of youth is on thy mind;
That glad fresh feeling that bestows
Itself the gladness which it knows,
The pure, the undefined;
And thou art in that happy hour
Of feeling's uncurbed, early power."
The spring dawned bright and beautiful over Wimbledon, and when the first
blue-birds sang on the budding boughs, and the grass was springing green
in streets and by-ways, the tenants of "Summer Home" returned; and a
bright young girl, with dark abundant hair hanging in a rich profusion of
shiny ringlets over her white, uncovered shoulders, was seen skipping
lightly through the gardens and grounds, pruning shrubs, transplanting
flowers, and training truant vines over arbors and alcoves.
It was Florence Howard, resplendent in the light of her girlish beauty,
and buoyant overflow of health and happiness. Often, in her morning
strolls, she noticed a tall, graceful boy, in a blue frock-coat, with a
shining morocco cap placed over a head of light curly hair, passing
along, satchel in hand, to the seminary on the hill, and every night she
saw him disappear within the forest that lay to the northward of her
father's residence.
She wondered what became of him, for the woods were wide and deep, and it
must be a long way to the other side. There surely could be no habitation
within their precincts, and Florence's curiosity was strongly excited to
fathom the mystery, which in her eyes surrounded the fair-haired youth.
"Father," said she one evening, as she sat beside him on the western
terrace, "I don't like being confined herewith these stupid tutors. I
wish you would let me go to school at the seminary."
"Your advantages at home are far superior, my daughter," answered her
father.
"O, but I should like the air and exercise, and the company of children
of my own age so much," pursued she, poking her little fingers through
her father's silvered locks, and leaning up against his side in a very
coaxing attitude. "I shall become the saddest mope in the world if I am
cooped up here."
"I apprehend small danger of that," returned her father, laughing, "for
you have appeared to me, since our last return, a wilder romp than ever
before."
"O, that's only because I'm so glad to get to this delightful place
again, and to know we are to go away no more!" said she. "It will wear
off after a while, and I shall become silent and solemn as a nun. Won't
you let me go to the seminary just one term? I can still take my music
lessons of Mrs. Sayles here at home, and I know my French and Italian
masters would like a respite from their duties." She stood looking
earnestly in her father's face.
"You smooth the way very well, my little daughter," said he, patting her
rosy cheek; "but I incline to think you had better continue your studies
in the old way."
Florence looked disappointed, and turned slowly from his side. Her
dejected appearance touched his affectionate heart, and he called her
back. She came bounding toward him, with new hope dancing in her dark
liquid eyes.
"If you can obtain your mother's consent," said he, "I will not object to
your attending school at the seminary one term, as you seem so much to
desire it."
"O, thank you, thank you, dear father!" exclaimed the glad girl, putting
her arms round his neck, and giving him a grateful kiss on either cheek,
"and may I commence to-morrow? that is, if mamma consents to my going?"
"To-morrow?" said he, "had you not better wait, as this term is so far
advanced, and commence with a new one?"
"O, no!" returned she, "I should rather begin at once."
"Well, go in, little Miss Rattle, and see what your sage mamma says on
the subject," said her father, smiling at her earnest countenance.
Away went Florence, with the lightness of a bird up the hall stairs, and,
giving a light tap at a closed door, stood dancing softly on tip-toe, as
she waited a summons to enter. "Who's there?" asked a low, trembling
voice at length.
"Me, mamma," answered Florence; "may I come in? I've something to ask
you."
The door was opened by a short, thin woman, of dark complexion, small
peering black eyes, and slick, shining hair of the same hue, which was
arranged with an air of nicety and precision.
Florence entered and glanced with an expression of alarm toward the drawn
curtains of a mahogany bedstead. "Is mother worse?" she asked in a voice
but a breath above a whisper.
"She has had one of her bleeding spells," answered the small, dark woman.
"Where is your father?"
"On the lower terrace; shall I call him?"
"No, I will go to him," returned the woman, "if you will remain by your
mother a while."
"O, yes, I shall be delighted to stay!" said Florence, approaching the
couch.
"You must not talk to her," remarked the woman; "she needs to be very
quiet."
"I won't speak a word unless she asks me to," answered the young girl,
sitting down by the bed-side, as the dark woman disappeared, closing the
door softly behind her.
After a few moments' silence the sick woman stirred and parted the
curtains slightly with her wan hand. Florence rose. "Do you want
anything, mother?" she asked.
"No, my dear, I have been asleep. Where is Hannah?"
"Gone below. I think to send father for Dr. Potipher."
"I hope not," said the invalid; "it is not necessary. This is only one of
my common attacks. I shall be as well as usual in a few days."
"Do you think so, mother?" asked Florence, brightening. "I feared you
were very ill. I had something particular to say, but I was not going to
say it, for fear of hurting you."
"What is it, dear?" inquired the mother.
"Something papa and I have been talking about down on the piazza
to-night."
"Well," said the sick woman, looking affectionately on the earnest
expression and downcast lids of Florence's large hazel eyes.
"I asked him to let me go to the seminary this term, and he said if you
had no objection I might do so," said the hesitating girl, at length,
with a long-drawn breath, as though she had relieved her bosom of a heavy
burden.
The pale lady was silent a few moments, as if revolving the matter in her
mind. Then she spoke suddenly. "You said your father had no objection?"
"Yes," answered Florence.
"Then, of course, I have none," said the woman, turning over on her
pillow and settling herself as if to sleep again.
Florence was about to pour forth her gratitude for the favor shown her
request, when the dark-browed woman entered, shook her finger at her, and
bade her go below. Florence's eyes flashed back her answer.
"I'll go at my mother's request, not otherwise," said she.
A dark frown gathered on the woman's features, and the invalid said
tremblingly, "I would like to sleep; perhaps you had better go and stay
with your father a while, my dear."
Florence kissed the pale brow, and then moved toward the door with
noiseless tread. The dark woman cast a glance of angry triumph upon her,
which was returned by one of fearless defiance.
Since Florence's earliest recollection her mother had been an invalid,
shunning society and subject to long fits of depression, and, upon the
slightest excitement, to severe attacks of palpitation and bleeding from
the chest, which frequently prostrated her on a bed of suffering for
weeks. Hannah Doliver had always been her attendant, though Florence, in
the simplicity of her young heart, often wondered that her parents should
retain her in their service; for she was a bold, impudent,
violent-tempered woman, who set up her will for law in the household, and
seemed to exercise an almost tyrannic sway over the weak invalid, who
appeared to stand in awe of her slightest nod. She showed a marked
dislike for Florence, and delighted in tantalizing her, when she was a
little child, and thwarting her wishes. As the fair girl grew older, she
resolved the arbitrary woman should not govern or intimidate her, and met
all her attempts at petty tyranny with a bold, undaunted spirit, which
seemed to increase the woman's hatred. Florence once asked her father why
he did not send Hannah Doliver away.
"Your mother could not do without her, my child," said he.
"I think she could do better without her than with her," returned
Florence, "for she is cross to mamma, and makes her do everything just as
she says."
"O, no, I guess not," said her father.
"But she does," persisted Florence, "and I would not have her in the
house." Major Howard patted his little daughter's cheek and said, "When
you are older, Florence, you will understand a great many things that
seem dark and mysterious to you now."
Florence was not satisfied, but she turned away, and never mentioned the
subject to her father again.
Early the next morning the glad-hearted girl was astir, getting in
readiness for school. She gathered her books together and placed them in
a satchel of crimson broadcloth, which she had just embroidered, with
bright German wools, in wreaths of spotted daisies and wild columbines.
Then donning a blue muslin frock, dotted over with small silver stars,
and tying on a black silk apron with open velvet pockets, from one of
which peeped a snowy lace-edged handkerchief, she took satchel, gloves
and gypsy hat, and descended to the parlor, ensconcing herself in a nook
of the north window, where she stood gazing over the hill-tops toward the
distant forest with eager eyes to behold the fair-haired boy emerge from
its recesses.
At length he appeared, and she watched him till he was descending the
hill which sloped past her father's mansion. Then, hastily tying on her
hat and seizing her satchel, she was hurrying through the hall to gain
the street, when she encountered Hannah Doliver.
"Where are you going?" demanded she in a sharp tone.
"To school," answered Florence, rushing past her.
"By whose leave, I wonder?" said the woman, running after her, to drag
her back. But the nimble-footed girl was too swift for her, and she
returned to the house muttering angrily to herself. Meantime, Florence
bounded over the gravelled walks, and was emerging from the gateway just
as the lad, in the morocco cap, was passing by. He arrested his steps on
beholding her, and bowed gracefully. She returned his salute, and said,
blushingly, "I am going to school up to the seminary. May I walk with
you?"
"Certainly, Miss Howard," answered he; "I shall be grateful for your
company."
"You know my name," said she, advancing to his side; "I am ignorant of
yours."
"Edgar Lindenwood," returned he, and the two walked on together.
----"She has dark violet eyes,
A voice as soft as moonlight. On her cheek
The blushing blood miraculous doth range
From sea-shell pink to sunset. When she speaks
Her soul is shining through her earnest face
As shines a moon through its up-swathing cloud.
My tongue's a very beggar in her praise,
It cannot gild her gold with all its words."
There was a neat, little vine-covered cottage standing a few doors
removed from the elegant mansion of Leroy Edson, and in it dwelt Mrs.
Stanhope, a widow lady and her maiden sister, Miss Martha Pinkerton,
a female of uncertain age, as authors say, and possessed of the
peculiarities common to persons of her class. They were not poor, nor
were they rich, but made a good living, as the world goes, by taking in
needlework. Young Mrs. Edson frequently dropped in to pass an hour in
social converse with Mrs. Stanhope, who was a pleasant, agreeable woman.
Miss Martha, too, always wore a smile on her sharp-featured face when
the lovely young wife appeared at the cottage. As they were simple,
unostentatious people, living in a retired and quiet way, she laid aside
all form and ceremony, and was accustomed to run in at any hour, in
whatever garb she chanced to be.
On a bright May morning, as the ladies had made all things tidy, and were
seating themselves to their daily avocation of the needle, they heard
the garden gate swing, and beheld Mrs. Edson approaching in her little
white sun-bonnet and spotted muslin dressing-gown, open from the waist
downwards, revealing a fine cambric skirt, wrought in several rows of
vines and deep scolloped edges. Mrs. Stanhope met her visitor on the
porch.
"Good-morning," said she, extending her hand; "I am happy to see
you:--how beautiful and eloquent you are looking!"
"O, this glorious, sweet-breathed morning, with its birds and flowers,
is enough to brighten the most torpid thing into animation!" exclaimed
Louise, grasping her friend's hand warmly. "You don't know how I love
everything and everybody to-day, Mrs. Stanhope," she continued, in a
tone of earnest enthusiasm, as she entered the little parlor, still
holding the good woman by one hand, while she extended the other to
Miss Pinkerton, who rose from her work to receive her, and drew an
old-fashioned, straight-backed rocking-chair, cushioned and lined with
gay copperplate, up before the window for her comfort. "I must not sit
long," said Louise, assuming the proffered seat, "for I have left my
house quite alone; the servants having gone out on errands for
themselves. I tried one thing and another to divert myself, but the
birds sang so sweetly, the sun was so bright, and everything seemed to
say, up and away. So I donned my sun-bonnet and ran over here as the
nicest, quietest little nook I could fly to; and where I should be as
welcome in my morning-gown as in full dress of ruffles and satins."
"And even more so, if possible," answered Mrs. Stanhope; "simple people
like us are always a good deal put out and embarrassed by grandeur and
display. It has something awful and unapproachable in our eyes."
"It has something servile and contemptible in mine," said Louise; "I
always shrink from a woman flaunted out in rustling silks, great,
glaring rings on her fingers, and alarming jewels swinging like
ponderous pendulums from her ears. I think what a poor, little, pinched,
narrow-contracted, poverty-stricken soul is there, that seeks to atone
for the lack within, by rigging her poor body out like a veritable queen
of harlots."
Mrs. Stanhope and Miss Martha burst into a cordial fit of laughter, as
Louise, with a good deal of spirit and sarcasm, delivered herself of the
preceding speech; and, before their merriment had subsided, a knock was
heard at the inner door, and Col. Malcome stepped in, bowing gracefully,
with a pleasant "Good-morning" to the three ladies. Mrs. Stanhope rose
and offered him a chair. Depositing a large package he held in his arms
on a corner of the sofa, he sat down.
Mrs. Edson blushed. She thought it was at being caught from home in
dishabille by a gentleman of the colonel's etiquette and high breeding.
After a few casual remarks upon the beauty of the morning, he turned his
discourse to her, and remarked:
"I am happy to meet you, Mrs. Edson; we are getting to be quite strangers
of late. Edith is lamenting that you do not honor us with more frequent
visits."
"I have often wished to call on your family, Col. Malcome," returned
Louise, in a calm, clear voice; "but since your daughter commenced
attending school, have desisted, lest I might inconvenience her."
"Edith does not go to the seminary after two o'clock," said he; "her
evenings are quite unemployed, and she would be highly gratified to
receive a call from you."
"I shall be pleased to call on her, and also to receive more frequent
visits from her. She has less to confine her at home than I; so her
visits should outnumber mine."
"Ay, yes; you speak sensibly, Mrs. Edson," returned he; "you have more
calls on your time than Edith. Strange I can never remember you are a
married woman."
"It would be well for you to remember it," said Louise, with a dignified
curve of her graceful neck, and slight addition of color, which very much
heightened her beauty.
"Mrs. Edson is so youthful in appearance," remarked Mrs. Stanhope, "I
think she might excuse one for forgetting she is a matron."
"I'll excuse you, Mrs. Stanhope," said Louise, rising; "I don't want to
be anything to you, but your little girl, and to run in here just when I
have a mind to, and to have you chide me when I do wrong, and love me
always, whether right or wrong. So good-morning," and, curtseying
gracefully, she glided from the room and retraced her steps to her own
mansion.
There was a silence of several minutes after she left, during which Col.
Malcome recollected his package, and, placing it on the table, politely
inquired if the ladies could oblige him by sewing a quantity of linen, of
which he should be in need in course of a few weeks, as he meditated
going a journey. They would be very willing to do it for him, could they
get it in readiness by the time he would want it; but they had a great
deal of unfinished work on their hands. Miss Pinkerton was confident they
could accomplish the colonel's, however.
"I am doubtful, Martha," said Mrs. Stanhope; "you know the large bundle
Mrs. Howard's waiting-woman brought in, last night."
"O, that can easily be put by," returned Martha.
"But Hannah said the major wanted it in a month at longest."
"Pshaw! that's a phrase of her own making. It sounds just like Hannah
Doliver's impertinent manner of expressing herself."
Col. Malcome gave a sudden start as Miss Pinkerton carelessly uttered
these words.
"What did you say was the name of Mrs. Howard's woman?" he demanded, with
an eagerness that astonished his hearers.
"Hannah Doliver," repeated Miss Martha; "do you know her?"
"No," said he, suddenly assuming an appearance of composure; "that is, I
think not; but I have frequently heard the name of Doliver before. How
long has she lived with Major Howard?"
"A great many years, I believe," answered Martha. "People hereabouts
wonder at their keeping the ill-tempered, arbitrary hussy. They say she
rules the whole house save Miss Florence."
"Ay; the young lady must have a spirit, then, I should judge, if she
defies such a virago as you describe this woman to be."
"No more spirit than she should have," returned Miss Pinkerton. "A sweet,
beautiful girl is Florence Howard as ever the sun shone upon."
"Ay, yes, indeed," interposed Mrs. Stanhope; "she used to call on us last
summer, when her embroidery teacher was away, to get Martha to assist her
in her tambour work; and I declare, I thought her the most lovable
creature I ever saw."
"I am told these Howards do not mingle much in society," remarked the
colonel carelessly.
"No," returned Mrs. S., "Mrs. Howard never goes out. She is a confirmed
invalid, and her disease inclines her to quiet and solitude. I don't
believe there's a woman in the village who has seen her in all the
seasons the family have passed at Summer Home."
"O, yes!" said Miss Martha. "Dilly Danforth, the washerwoman, saw her
once. When she was there a year ago this spring, putting the house to
rights, she cleaned the paint and windows of Mrs. Howard's room, and thus
got a sight at the invalid. She told me she was a pale, thin woman, with
a distressed expression of countenance. Her hair was nearly white, and
she looked much older than her husband."
Col. Malcome stood before a window with his back toward the ladies,
listening intently to their words.
"I have understood that Miss Florence is attending school at the seminary
this term," remarked Mrs. Stanhope, at length; "do you know if it is so,
Col. Malcome?"
"I think I heard Edith and Rufus say something to that effect," answered
he.
"I hope she will drop in and see us some day," said Miss Pinkerton. "She
and Mrs. Edson are great favorites of mine, and I doubt not your pretty
daughter would become one also, if I should get acquainted with her. We
are but humble people, but should be very happy to receive a call from
Miss Edith."
"Thank you," said the colonel; "'tis very possible she may some time
visit you, though she is rather timid and inclined to shrink from
strangers. Well, ladies, shall I leave my work?" he added, laying his
white hand on the package as he stepped toward the door.
"Yes," answered Miss Martha; "I will engage to have it ready in season
for you."
He bowed and withdrew. Miss Pinkerton peeped through the curtain, as he
walked down the garden path, and thought she had never beheld so handsome
and elegant a specimen of the genus homo.
"O, loveliest time! O, happiest day!
When the heart is unconscious, and knows not its sway;
When the favorite bird, or the earliest flower,
Or the crouching fawn's eyes make the joy of the hour,
And the spirits and steps are as light as the sleep
Which never has wakened to watch or to weep.
She bounds on the soft grass,--half woman, half child,
As gay as her antelope, almost as wild.
The bloom of her cheek is like that on her years.
She has never known pain--she has never known tears;
And thought has no grief, and no fear to impart;
The shadow of Eden is yet on her heart."
"Father!" said Florence Howard, the second day of her first vacation,
"had I not better study Latin next term?"
"Latin!" answered he in a tone of surprise, "why should you study that?"
"O, for discipline to my mind," returned Florence.
"I think you will find the acquirement of French and Italian sufficient
discipline," said he.
"O, but they are so easily learned! I want something more
difficult--something I have to study hard on."
"Why, you would be running to me to get your lessons for you half the
time!" said her father, laughing.
"No, I wouldn't," answered she, shaking her curly head cunningly. "Edgar
would assist me."
"Edgar! and who is he?" inquired Major Howard.
"Why, Edgar Lindenwood! You know him," returned she.
"No, certainly I don't know anything about him," said her father.
"Why, you have seen the tall boy with the morocco cap and light curls,
that used to walk to school with me last term!" said Florence, looking
earnestly in his face.
"O, yes! I have seen him frequently," returned Major H. "What do you say
is his name?"
"Edgar Lindenwood."
"And where does he live?"
"With his uncle."
"And who is his uncle?"
"The Hermit of the Cedars."
"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Major Howard. "And so, this young hermit is going
to teach you Latin, Miss Florence? Romantic, upon my word!"
"Edgar is not a hermit!" said Florence, pouting her red lips and assuming
an air of dignity which vastly amused her father. "He is brave,
and bright, and handsome, and, our preceptor says, already a finer
scholar than many a graduate from the university."
"Well, well; I cannot argue the merits of this favorite of yours,
Florence," said her father; "but I promise to give him a larger share of
my attention henceforth."
"I wish you would, father," said Florence. "I may bring him home with me
from school some day,--may I not?"
"No!" returned Major Howard. "I can notice him in the street."
"But you cannot judge of him so far off," pursued Florence. "He looks
better the nearer you approach him."
"I shall judge him best at a distance," remarked her father, moving
away.
Florence did not exactly like the tone of voice in which he uttered
these last words; but she soon forgot all else in the contemplation of
studying Latin, and having Edgar's assistance in learning her lessons.
She had never in her life taken any note of time,--never felt it lag
heavily on her hands; but it appeared to her now that these interminable
days of vacation would never come to an end. She passed one of them with
Edith and Rufus Malcome, and this was by far the most insupportable of
any. "She loved Edith dearly," she said; "but could not endure the
childish prattle and frivolity of Rufus."
He was six months older than Florence, and Edith had seen seventeen
summers, while Florence was only in her fifteenth; but she was so well
matured in manners and appearance as to seem the senior of the delicate,
retiring Edith.
Col. Malcome paid her many courteous attentions during her visit, and
expressed an ardent hope that a friendship and intimacy might spring up
between her and his daughter.
Florence said she should be delighted to form a companionship with
Edith.
"We are located so near the seminary," said Col. Malcome, as she was
preparing to return home, and Rufus stood waiting to accompany her;
"while your father's mansion is so distant, that it will be very
convenient for you, on rough days, to come and pass the night with
Edith. Indeed, I should be highly gratified if you would make my house a
sort of second home, and come in, familiarly, every day, if you choose."
Florence thanked him for his kindness, kissed Edith, and descended to
the street in company with Rufus.
Col. Malcome approached the window and regarded the couple earnestly
till they passed beyond his view, while strange, dark, commingled
expressions passed over his face. Edith crept up to him and said softly,
"What troubles you, father?"
He looked down sternly on her sweet, upturned face, and said in a tone
of strong command:
"Edith, I desire you to cultivate the acquaintance of Florence Howard by
every means in your power."
"I shall be glad to do so, father," answered she, with a look and tone
which deprecated his sternness.
"'Tis well, then," said he, relaxing his brow and imprinting a kiss on
her soft cheek as he turned away and stepped forth upon the piazza. The
full moon was just rising in the east; the river rippled sweetly in the
distance, and the whippoorwills piped their sharp, shrill notes on the
hushed evening air. Suddenly he heard the garden-gate unclose, and,
turning, beheld Mrs. Edson and her husband approaching. Descending the
marble steps, he met them in the avenue, and, after a cordial
interchange of salutations, ushered them into the gas-lighted
drawing-room, where Edith, in a gossamer-like muslin, reclined on a
velvet ottoman.
The evening passed pleasantly to all but Mr. Edson, who sat like a
pantomime in a play, staring and grinning at what he could not
understand or digest. Col. Malcome seemed, however, to take a malicious
pleasure in placing his guest in the most awkward positions, and showing
off his own superior grace and polish to the best advantage. If
anything, he rather overdone. But perhaps he thought with Mrs. Salsify
Mumbles in this case, "Better overshoot than fall short." Louise was
graceful and self-possessed as usual; and it must be confessed did not
appear very much disconcerted when Col. M. showed her husband in some
ridiculous light, or mercilessly uncurtained his crude, narrow-minded
opinions and ideas.
Scorn and contempt for the man she had married were fast mastering all
kinder feelings she once had toward him.
"I bid you leave the girl, and think no more
About her from henceforth."
"Ah, I can leave
Her, sire;--but to forget will be, I fear,
A thing beyond my power."
It was midsummer, and the Hermit of the Cedars sat under his low piazza,
curiously constructed of the enwreathed boughs and branches of evergreen
trees. He held a volume in his attenuated hand, with the contents of
which, he seemed intently occupied. His appearance was melancholy in the
extreme. A pale, thin face;--deep sunken eyes, and a broad, high brow,
by sorrow seamed with furrows long and wide; for she doth ever dig with
deeper, harsher hand than time. A loose linen garment was wrapped around
his tall, gaunt form, and a white handkerchief tied over his head to
prevent the passing breezes from blowing his thin, straggling gray hair
about his features.
So intent was he on the contents of his book that he did not notice the
approach of the cheerer of his solitude. Edgar came along the narrow
path with a step quicker and more impatient than was his wont, and there
was an expression on his fine, manly face which had something of
mortification and anger, but more of regret and sorrow. He threw his
satchel on the ground, and sat down at the hermit's feet, who laid aside
his volume, on beholding him in that position, and asked him if he was
fatigued or ill.
"No," said the youth, "but I shall be glad when I am gone away from here
to the university."
"Ah!" returned the hermit, "it is as I knew it would be when I placed
you at the seminary. Your desire for fame and honor has returned, and
you long to go forth in the great world and mingle in its
"No," said Edgar, "I would rather live and die within the walls of this
hermitage, than ever go beyond them again; but I'm resolved I will not
do the foolish thing. I'll go forth, and if my life is spared, show
those who call me a foundling, and a wild cub of the woods, that I am
something more than they suppose me to be."
"Who has dared apply such epithets to you, my boy?" exclaimed the
hermit, his pale cheeks glowing with anger.
"Do you know Major Howard of 'Summer Home?'" asked Edgar.
"That do I," answered the hermit; "and did he call you by these names?"
"Yes," returned Edgar.
"_He_ talk of foundlings!" said the hermit. "Why did you not slap him in
the face, Edgar?"
"The words did not come directly from him to me," said the youth,
wondering at his uncle's anger, which far exceeded his own.
"Ay, through a third person you obtained them? and that was"----
"His daughter, Florence Howard."
"Florence Howard!" repeated his uncle, "and what do you know of her?"
"I have been to school with her four or five months, and have assisted
her in her Latin studies this summer," returned Edgar.
"And shall never behold her face again!" said the hermit, in a tone of
angry vehemence, bringing his heavy sandalled foot down upon the wooden
sill with a violence that made Edgar start from his lounging posture on
the turf, and gaze with amazement upon the fierce workings of a face he
had never seen flushed by an angry emotion before. He feared his uncle
had suddenly gone mad, and stood indeterminate what course to pursue,
when the countenance before him changed, the eyes closed, and the hermit
fell heavily on the green sward in front of his door. Edgar, in his
alarm, lifted the prostrate form in his strong, young arms, and bore him
to the low, rough couch, which was their nightly resting-place. Then,
fire-place, he poured its contents in a cup, and bathed the temples of
the deathly-looking face till the eyes opened with recognition, and the
lips moved, though inaudibly.
He watched by the bed-side several hours, and at length the hermit rose
suddenly to his feet, and bade Edgar retire. He obeyed, and closed his
eyes, but not to sleep. Opening them after a while, he beheld his uncle
sitting before the table engaged in writing. Again the lids closed, and
he fell into a light drowse, during which Florence Howard flitted before
him in countless variety of forms. When again he looked around he was
alone. The long summer twilight had deepened into evening, and Edgar
rose and lighted a lamp. On the table he discovered a small, folded
billet, addressed to him. He sank on his knees, opened it, and read.
Various were the expressions that flitted over his features as he did
so. When he had finished he refolded it carefully, and, drawing a bunch
of keys from his pocket, unlocked a small box which sat on the table,
placed the letter within, then relocked it and returned the keys to his
pocket.
Then he extinguished the lamp and sat down in the window-nook to his
watch of the stars.
But his thoughts were different from what they once were when he gazed
on their glistening faces.
His soul-pinions had kissed the earth, and become fouled by contact with
a grosser element; and heavy with a weltering weight of woe, that they
could not soar aloft and hover over the casements of angelic homes, to
rest at last on the glory-bright hills of heaven.
"I only know their dream was vain,
And that they woke to find it past,
And when by chance they met again,
It was not as they parted last.
His was not faith that lightly dies;
For truth and love as clearly shone
In the blue heaven of his soft eyes
As the dark midnight of her own.
And therefore heaven alone can tell
What are his living visions now,
But hers--the eye can read too well
The language written on her brow."
The yearly examination and exhibition of Cedar Hill Seminary was
approaching, and teachers and pupils were busied with preparations in
order to pass the ordeal creditably to themselves and to the
institution.
Prominent among the list of performers stood the name of Edgar
Lindenwood, often in juxtaposition with that of Florence Howard. Since
the scene in the hermit's hut, Edgar, as commanded by his uncle, had
studiously avoided Florence, and she, for a still longer period, had
evinced a certain distance and reserve toward him. Edgar's knowledge of
her father's dislike might be sufficient cause to part him from her, but
it could by no means justify his growing intercourse with Edith Malcome.
As the time approached for the exhibition, Florence asked her father's
permission to absent herself entirely and remain at home. Maj. Howard
thought she had better attend, as she had been to school several terms;
but she said she felt too languid to take part in the exercises, and
thus obtained the excuse of her indulgent father.
Edgar's quick, impassioned nature regarded her absence as a direct
insult to himself, for in all the parts assigned her, she would be
brought on the stage in company with him, and frequently obliged to hold
single converse. If this opinion needed further confirmation it was
added, when she appeared at the Scholars' Levee, held on the evening of
the exhibition, in elegant dress and dashing spirits, with Rufus Malcome
for a partner.
They passed each other in the dance without a token of recognition.
Edgar attached himself to Edith for the larger part of the evening.
After the first two or three cotillons he did not care to join them; and
Edith, being too delicate to bear the excitement, they roamed through
the hall, conversing together of the events of the exhibition, or
mingling among groups of the village people who had assembled by
invitation to partake in the festive scene.
"Ha, my little fairy!" whispered Mrs. Edson in the ear of Edith, as she
was sauntering past on the arm of Lindenwood, unmindful of her friend's
proximity; "are you so far skyward you can't see poor Louise? Introduce
me to your princely gallant, an' it please you."
Edith turned and presented Edgar to Mrs. Edson, who instantly found them
a place in the group around her.
"This scene brings vividly before me my happy school days," she
remarked, tears welling up to her beautiful eyes, which she dashed
hurriedly away, exclaiming, "but I must not begin to prose about myself
when I was young, lest I drive you all away by my tedious recitals."
"Mr. Lindenwood," said she, turning to Edgar, "though we have never met
before, your vivid personations on the stage to-day have caused you to
seem more like an old friend than a comparative stranger."
Edgar expressed his pleasure that his poor performances had met her
approbation, and also that she condescended to recognize him as a
friend.
"What a graceful creature is Florence Howard!" continued Mrs. Edson, as
the fair girl whirled past her in the dance. "Edith, your brother should
consider himself most fortunate in securing the most brilliant lady in
the room for a partner; no disparagement to your charms, my dear," she
added, leaning over and bestowing a kiss on the soft cheek of the
blushing girl. "You know what I think of you, darling. The spirit of
beauty is everywhere, says the poet. She assumes the largest variety of
types and forms, and, verily, she has given her most dangerous one to
Florence Howard. She is the brilliant dahlia, the pride of the gay
parterre; but my Edith is the modest daisy blooming in some sheltered
nook. The stormy winds shall rend the one from its lofty stalk and
scatter its wealth of purple leaves o'er the miry earth, while dews and
sunbeams kiss the modest plant that blooms in the lowly vale. Is it not
so, Mr. Lindenwood?" she asked, as, pausing, she encountered his gaze
fixed earnestly on her face.
"I don't know," he said; "that is, I have not considered the subject.
Edith, I think the party are retiring," he added, turning his eyes to
several disjointed groups; "remain with Mrs. Edson a few moments and I
will return to you."
As he entered the ladies' dressing room, he saw Florence standing alone
by the window, in the very spot where they had often stood in the
interim of recitations, and studied their lessons from the same book. He
thought he would give the world to know she was thinking of those times
now. Approaching softly he stood near her in silence a few moments.
"O, Florence!" said he, at length, in a low, deep tone, tremulous with
intense feeling and tenderness. Was there not enough of passionate
devotion breathed in that one word to convince her of his eternal,
unchanging affection?
What poor, weak simpletons are we, to pine and languish for words, where
looks and tones are infinitely more expressive! Some people affirm that
"actions speak louder than words." But we can't say much in favor of
those, because, as far as we know, people in love invariably act like
fools.
Florence turned at Edgar's adjuration, and he saw, by the moonlight, two
great tear-drops dimming her starry eyes. He was about to extend his
hand when Rufus Malcome rushed into the room, calling her name. Changing
his purpose, he said, in a light conventional tone, "Have you been happy
to night?"
"O, very!" answered she, with a gay laugh, which echoed in his ear long
after she had taken the arm of Rufus and tripped lightly away.
When Edgar returned to Edith, he found Col. Malcome in lively
conversation with Mrs. Edson. Florence and Rufus had disappeared, and
Edith signifying her wish to retire, he led her from the hall and
escorted her home. He found Florence in Col. Malcome's parlor sitting on
a sofa with Rufus at her side.
"Come in, Lindenwood," said he; "here's room for us all."
"Thank you," returned Edgar. "I have a long walk before me, and must not
tarry."
"O, stay with us to night," said Rufus.
"We should be pleased to have you remain, if agreeable," remarked Edith,
timidly.
"It would be very agreeable," said Edgar, politely, "but my absence
would alarm my uncle."
"O, he wants to be off to his hermitage!" laughed Rufus, coarsely; "let
him go. You will stay, won't you, Florence?"
"If Edith invites me," returned she.
"Well, I do," said Edith quickly.
"Then the point is settled," remarked Florence.
"Good-night to you all," said Edgar, moving hastily toward the door.
Scarce ten minutes had elapsed, after his departure, when Florence rose
and said, "Now I am going."
"Why, you just promised to remain all night," said Rufus, in a tone of
undisguised disappointment.
"No," said she; "I made no promise, and I am going."
"Then I'll go with you," returned Rufus, seizing his hat.
"No," said Col. Malcome, suddenly entering the apartment. "With Miss
Howard's consent, I'll be her escort home to-night."
Florence said she should be honored by his company. So bidding
good-night to Edith and Rufus, she took his proffered arm and descended
to the street.
"How have you enjoyed the ball to-night?" inquired he, as they walked on
together.
"Very well," answered she, briefly.
"This young Lindenwood, that burrows with the strange chap they call the
'Hermit of the Cedars;' you are acquainted with him, I believe."
"He has attended school at the seminary, since I commenced to go,"
answered Florence, as calmly as she was able.
"He has been paying Edith some attentions of late," continued the
colonel, in a careless tone; "do you suppose he really cares for her?"
"I don't know," answered Florence; and her voice trembled in spite of
her efforts to steady it.
"Of course you don't know," the colonel went on, still in that cold,
indifferent tone; "I merely asked what you thought?"
"I never thought anything about it in my life," said Florence, in a
choking voice.
"That's rather strange," returned he. "I have thought of it several
times lately;--but here we are at your father's gate. Present my
regards, and say I would be happy to receive a call from him whenever he
is so disposed."
Florence bowed good-evening to her gallant, and hurried to her own
apartment.
The night was warm. A waning moon lighted the eastern terrace, and, not
feeling disposed to sleep, she stepped through a window that opened to
the floor, and, leaning against a pillar, stood silently gazing over the
gardens and grounds below.
She had not been standing long thus when she beheld the figure of a man
moving slowly along the gravelled walks, pausing frequently and fixing
an earnest gaze on the windows of the apartment occupied by her mother.
She grew alarmed, and was about descending the stairs to arouse her
father, when she heard the hall door open softly, and saw the figure of
a woman stealing down the garden path. She recognized the dark form
instantly as that of Hannah Doliver. The man met her and the two went
into a green-house. After an hour the woman reappeared, and retraced her
steps to the mansion, but the man she saw no more. Securing her windows,
Florence retired, resolving to impart to her father a history of what
she had seen.
When, she did so, he only laughed at her and said he supposed it was
some enamored knight come to pay his devoirs to the fair lady of his
love, and counselled her to say no more of the matter, as it would
needlessly irritate Hannah to know her secret was discovered.
"The world hath used me well, and now at length
In peace and quietness I sit me down
To feed upon the fruits of my hard toils.
Ambition doth no more distract my breast,--
I've reached the height my spirit strove to gain;
Here will I rest, and watch life glide away."
It is quite time for us to call on Mrs. Salsify Mumbles again. We fear
the good lady, who is rather sensitive on such points, has felt
neglected ere this; but we hope not, and, as her mansion heaves in view,
we are convinced that matters of more importance than visits from our
humble selves, have engaged our old friend's attention.
The second story has actually gone up, and the piazza spreads its white
palings along the sides of Mr. Salsify's dwelling. The pasteboard sign
of "Mr. Theophilus Shaw, Boot & Shoe Maker," is no longer seen swinging
from the bed-room window, but a new sign stretches its sublime length
over the doors of Mr. Salsify's old grocery, announcing, in staring
black and yellow, to the inhabitants of Wimbledon, that "Mumbles, Shaw &
Co., wholesale dealers in pork, cheese, onions, dried apples, sausages,
and verdigris, continue at the old stand, No. 9 Temple street, where
they will entertain the trading public in a genteel and finished
manner."
Thus it appears Mr. Salsify's high hopes are at length realized. Most
fortunate man! He has "risen in his profession" to the topmost summit of
his earthly ambition.
Happy will it be for him if he remains content with his present
elevation, and goes not, like too many restless mortals, clambering to a
higher point, only to fall back, on some adverse day, into the slough of
ill-luck and despondency.
Mrs. Salsify sits in her parlor making caps for her thumb, at least we
should judge so, from their surprisingly small dimensions; and Mary
Madeline is nowhere to be seen. But Dilly Danforth is in the kitchen
bending over a great wash-tub, pale and sunken-eyed as ever. Now that we
look at this woman attentively, it strikes us she is wonderfully like
that lank-visaged man, who dwells in the lonely forest hut, the "Hermit
of the Cedars," as he is called. But then it may be only the resemblance
which all the sons and daughters of affliction have in common. 'Tis not
likely 'tis more than that. And gazing on Willie, who stands over the
great arches, replenishing the fires, and at intervals poking the white
heaps of linen beneath the fierce bubbling suds with a long wooden
shovel, we fancy for a moment there's something about him like Edgar
Lindenwood. Of course, he is not so large or so well-dressed;
nevertheless, he is greatly improved since we last saw him; and there is
something in the turn of the head, which is certainly finely shaped,
though placed on the shoulders of a beggar boy; and something in the set
of the rusty cloth cap over the bright, sunny curls, that reminds us of
the tall, graceful lad we used to see winding his way over the hills to
the large, white seminary. But then, a great many boys have
pretty-formed heads, and bright, curly hair; and, should we attempt, no
doubt we could find a large number with more points of resemblance than
we have been able to make out between Edgar Lindenwood and Willie
Danforth. We are full of conceits. Sometimes Edith Malcome is like
Florence Howard, and Rufus' glistening, coal-black hair reminds us of
Hannah Doliver, while the handsome colonel has a look we cannot fathom,
and from which we turn with a creeping shudder.
'Tis quite astonishing what strange fancies possess people at times.
While we have been indulging in ours, Mrs. Mumbles has put away those
impossible caps, and come into the kitchen to see how matters and things
are progressing, and just as she begins to tell Aunt Dilly, that she
"wants her to get through washing in time to scour down the pantry
shelves and scrub the oil-cloth on the dining-room floor," in runs Miss
Susan Pimble, and says, "Mamma wants Mrs. Danforth to come and do a
little light work for her, to-morrow; for she has got to go to Goslin
Flats to attend a great mass convention, and can't stop to do it
herself. She will pay Aunt Dilly well, if she will oblige her. Garrison
has been sick--Peggy Nonce is away on a visit to her son, who has
recently been married, and mamma's public duties and household affairs
have proved too heavy for her shoulders," etc., etc.
Susy ran through a long rigmarole, with a volubility worthy the daughter
of a fluent public speaker.
We hasten away lest our mania for discovering resemblances should detect
one between Mrs. Salsify Mumbles and pert Susy Pimble.
"Ay, little do those features wear
The shade of sin,--the soil of care;
The hair is parted o'er a brow
Open and white as mountain-snow,
And clusters there in many a ring,
With sun and summer glistening.
Yet something on that brow has wrought
A moment's cast of angry thought."
In an arbor of Major Howard's elegant garden, the moonlight shimmering
its rich, clustering vines with silver, and the night-breezes murmuring
in low, musical voices among the dark green leaves, sat a man of
commanding aspect and handsome features. Light auburn hair, closely
trimmed, lay in short, thick masses of wavy curls around his high, pale
brow. His mien and manner indicated the well-bred gentleman. A small,
dark figure crouched beside him. It was Hannah Doliver.
"We meet again at last," said the man, after a considerable silence. His
voice was low and deep, and the woman trembled as she answered,
"I marvel how you have discovered me."
"Few things escape my knowledge which it subserves my interest to know,"
returned he. "What in the name of all the fiends possessed you to enter
the service of Tom Howard?"
"A lone, forsaken female finds shelter where she can," whined the woman.
"O, don't babble in that hypocritical tone!" said the man. "I did not
leave you so destitute; and I took the child off your hands that no
incumbrance might fetter your footsteps."
"Fiend!" exclaimed Hannah. "You shall not talk to me thus. What have you
done with my boy?"
"I have done well by him," answered the man. "He has been reared as a
gentleman. No stain has ever been suspected on his birth."
"Where is he?" asked she, in a voice trembling with emotion.
"He is near you. I left him but an hour ago, well and happy."
"Near me!" said the woman almost wildly. "It cannot be--you lie to me,
Herbert!"
"By the heavens above, I utter the solemn truth!" returned the man.
"What name does he bear?"
The man bowed his tall form and whispered in her ear. She sprang to her
feet, paced hurriedly to and fro down the little alcove, and at length
threw herself on her knees and exclaimed,
"O, let me see him! Can you be so cruel as to withhold the child from
his mother's right?"
"It rests with you to decide whether you see him or no," said the man,
wholly unmoved by her distress and emotion. Swear to keep my presence
here a secret, and do my bidding in all things, and you may see your boy
when you choose."
"I swear!" answered the woman, frantically.
"Tell me first why you are here serving Tom Howard's wife?"
"I am not serving his wife."
"Who then?"
"His sister."
"His sister!" exclaimed the man, now evincing strong emotion. "And does
she live?"
"She lives; and lives to palm herself off on the world as the wife of
her own brother."
"What iniquity!" said the man. The woman burst into a low laugh.
"Why do you laugh?" demanded he, fiercely.
"Because iniquity comes so prettily from your lips," replied she in a
sarcastic tone.
"Take care, woman!" said he. "Remember you are in my power."
The little dark figure trembled and was silent.
"I wonder she would receive you again into her service," remarked the
man at length in an absorbed tone.
"Fear is a strong motive. I threatened to reveal her deception to the
public."
"Ay, you have some skill and tact, I find!" said he, rising. "Now
remember, when I wish to see your mistress, you are to gain me an
entrance to her."
"What do you want to see her for?" asked the woman. "I believe a sight
of you would throw her into fits."
"It is none of your business why I wish to see her," said he. "But mind,
you do not look on your boy unless you implicitly obey all my commands."
Here he stooped and whispered again in her ear.
"I hate the girl!" she said, after he had ceased speaking and stood
gazing down on her, twirling his velvet cap carelessly in his hand.
"But you would like to see your boy so well married," remarked he.
"'Twould be a sweet revenge," she said in a chuckling tone. He turned
to depart.
"Herbert!" she called, softly.
"What do you wish?" said he, pausing.
The woman hesitated, and at length said, "The girl--her child I mean; is
she----?"
Again the man whispered in her ear. "None can say," he added aloud,
"that I have not been a kind parent to my children."
"I'm glad there's some virtue in you," said the woman, turning toward
the quiet mansion that stood in almost palace-like magnificence in the
midst of the beautiful grounds that surrounded it on all sides. The man
lingered behind, and finally left the garden by a path lying in an
opposite direction from the one by which he had entered. He bent his
steps rapidly in the direction of the river. Either the warmth of the
night or his own emotions oppressed him; for, as he gained its banks, he
slackened his pace, drew off his cap, and loosened his collar. With
arms folded across his chest, he moved slowly along, like one intensely
absorbed in some dark and intricate train of thought. Sometimes he
muttered to himself, and made strange gestures, or tossed his head with
a confident air, as though he saw onward to the success of some plan he
concerted. So occupied was he in his own thoughts, that he never saw the
tall, gaunt figure of a man, crouching in the shadow of a small linden
tree, that stood on the bank of the river, nearly opposite Dilly
Danforth's wretched abode, although he passed in so close contact as to
brush against the little bundle of sticks the unknown held in his hand,
while his deep, sunken eyes glared on the passer till they seemed nearly
starting from their sockets.
"'Tis he!" murmured the gazer, when the abstracted one was beyond the
sound of his voice. "I must see where he goes;" and, stealing
noiselessly to the door of Dilly's abode, he placed the bundle of sticks
on her sill, and slowly followed the receding figure.
"And the clear depths of her dark eye
Were bright with troubled brilliancy,
Yet the lips drooped as with the tear,
Which might oppress, but not appear.
Her curls, with all their sunny glow,
Were braided o'er an aching brow;
But well she knew how many sought
To gaze upon her secret thought;--
And love is proud--she might not brook
That others on her heart should look."
One pleasant autumn evening a social group were assembled in Mr. Leroy
Edson's tasteful parlor. A tall, argand lamp on a marble table, shed its
mild, ethereal light over the rich furniture. A bright fire glowed in
the marble grate, and in the genial atmosphere of her own creating,
young Mrs. Edson moved, a thing of grace and beauty. She wore a robe of
emerald Genoa velvet, with an open bodice, laced over a chemisette of
fine-wrought Mechlin lace. Broad, drooping Pagoda sleeves revealed her
white arms encircled by quaintly-fashioned jet bracelets. Her guests
were not numerous, but select. Col. Malcome and his family were most
prominent among the number. Florence Howard was there, attended by
Rufus, and Edgar Lindenwood in company with Edith. Jenny Andrews, with
no less a personage than our quondam, roguish friend, Dick Giblet,
shop-boy of Mr. Salsify Mumbles' grocery; now Mr. Richard Giblet, of the
firm of Edson, Giblet & Co. A very respectable appearance Dick made,
too, for he was a quick, sprightly young fellow, albeit somewhat
over-fond of a mischievous joke; but this he would outgrow in time
probably. Amy Seaton, sedate and modest as ever, with laughing Charlie
for her beau, and several others, among whom we might mention Miss
Martha Pinkerton, made up the little party.
Edith looked fragile and sweet as ever in a dress of azure thibet cloth,
her light hair hanging in clusters of wavy curls over her small
shoulders. She leaned gracefully on the arm of Lindenwood, and looked in
his face with a gentle, artless expression of countenance.
Florence, in her crimson cashmere, and dark, massy ringlets, looked a
shade paler than when we last saw her, but more queenly and brilliant,
if possible.
There were many points of resemblance between her and Louise Edson. Both
were endowed with superior mental and intellectual powers; both
accomplished and beautiful; but there was at times a gentleness in
Florence's manner, a dreamy light in the far depths of her large, hazel
eyes, that indicated less firmness and strength of character, with
tenderer susceptibilities. Perhaps life's trials would sooner unnerve
her spirit.
Mr. Edson was not present, nor was it necessary he should be, to enhance
the enjoyment of his gifted wife. He was, in fact, very much the same
sort of an appendage in his elegant mansion that Mrs. Pimble averred her
husband to be in his,--"a mere crank to keep the machine in motion." Not
that Mrs. Edson monopolized her husband's sphere, as did the masculine
Mrs. Pimble. By no means. She appeared to give her lord full sway and
sceptre in his own household, and the good-natured man thought never
husband had so obedient, condescending partner as blessed his bosom.
Consummate actress, to conquer where she seemed to yield, and use her
advantages so skilfully that the vanquished felt himself the victor.
Mrs. Pimble stormed and blustered, but she exercised not half the power
over her household that Louise Edson swayed by a soft word or placid
smile.
But we forget our party, which waxes merry as the evening progresses,
warmed by the genial influences of social intercourse. Col. Malcome and
Mrs. Edson discussed the merits of different authors; Lindenwood
modestly joined them, and Florence dropped an occasional word. Edith sat
silent. Rufus yawned, and at length commenced a game of forfeits with
Dick Giblet, over which he soon grew so boisterous, that his father
reproved him sternly for a violation of the rules of politeness. The
youth's brow flushed with sudden anger, and for the remainder of the
evening he sat apart from the company. When the party dispersed he did
not come forward to claim Florence, and she fell a second time to the
care of Col. Malcome. Edgar escorted Edith, and the couples went
different ways to reach their destinations. Edgar took the street by the
river, and Col. M. that leading past the seminary. The latter had much
the longer walk; but Edith, fragile and delicate, complained of fatigue,
ere they had proceeded far, and Edgar proposed she should rest awhile on
the trunk of a fallen tree by the river's brink. She sat down, and he,
after a few moments, assumed a seat at her side. Her veil was thrown
off, and her small silk hat had fallen back from her head, revealing in
full her girlish features and wavy, auburn curls. Edgar was gazing on
the beautiful face, when suddenly a footstep met his ear, and, turning,
he beheld his uncle, the hermit, standing before them, staring wildly
upon Edith; who, as soon as she discovered the strange-looking being,
uttered a faint scream and sunk on Edgar's bosom. "Don't be alarmed,"
said he, whispering in her ear; "this man will not harm you,"--and then
lifting his head to address his uncle, and inquire what brought him
there, so far from home at that late hour, he found the hermit had
disappeared.
Calming Edith's alarm as well as he was able, he escorted her home, and
then set off for the hut in the forest, pondering, as he went, upon the
event of the evening, and wondering what could be the cause of the
fierce and ireful expression which disfigured the usually placid face of
his uncle, as he gazed so fixedly on Edith. It reminded him of the
violent passion evinced in regard to his intercourse with Florence
Howard. He knew the recluse had experienced a severe disappointment in
early life, and concluded this had tended to sour his mind toward the
whole female race, and caused him to look with angry distrust upon the
most gentle and lovely of the sex. In no other way could he account for
the repugnance manifested by his uncle toward his friendship and
acquaintance with both Florence and Edith. Thus ruminating, he reached
the forest habitation to find all dark and gloomy. The hermit had not
returned to his hut.
Col. Malcome lingered a moment as he escorted Florence to the door of
her father's mansion, and, as he did so, Major Howard stepped forth,
rather suddenly. Florence presented him to the colonel, and the two
gentlemen shook hands cordially.
"I have frequently desired to call on you and form your acquaintance,
Col. Malcome," said the major; "but frequent absences from home, and the
delicate health of my wife, have prevented me hitherto."
A slight, cynical smile flitted over the colonel's face at these latter
words, but it was not observed in the obscure light of evening, and he
answered, politely, that he had often desired an acquaintance with the
major, and hoped that now their children had established a friendly
intercourse, the parents might soon follow the example.
Major Howard expressed a wish that it might be so, and Col. Malcome,
bowing gracefully, retired.
Florence, after inquiring for her mother, and learning she was
comfortable as usual, ascended to her room, made fast the door, and drew
forth her journal, which was the dearest companion of her lonely hours,
the receptacle of her most treasured thoughts, and safety-valve for all
unuttered griefs and hidden sorrows.
She had scarcely touched her gold-tipped pen to the virgin page, when a
soft knock on the door displaced her train of thought.
"Father?" said she putting her lips close to the lock, for he was the
only one from whom she could expect a call at that late hour. There was
no answer. She hesitated a moment, and then opened the door. Hannah
Doliver slid in.
Florence stood still, gazing with astonishment on the little wiry form,
as it wormed around the apartment, touching the books, and giving sudden
pulls at the curtains and bed drapery. She had never seen Hannah over
her threshold before, and wondered what a visit from her might import.
"I came to see if you wanted anything, Miss Florence," said the woman,
at length, fixing her twinkling eyes on the fair girl's face.
"No!" said Florence, in an impatient tone; "what should I want at this
hour, but to be alone?"
"O, I'm not going to intrude upon you but a moment," returned Hannah. "I
thought, as you had been out late and 'twas rather cold, you might want
a fire lighted in your room, or a cup of warm tea, or something; so I
ran up to see." Florence grew more and more astonished. "Have you
enjoyed yourself this evening?" asked Hannah.
"Yes," answered Florence briefly.
"I am glad to hear it," returned the woman. "This Col. Mer---- what is
his name?" she paused and asked abruptly.
"Malcome," said Florence.
"O, yes! I'm bad at remembering strange names. Well, this Col. Malcome
has got some fine children, has he not?"
"Yes," returned Florence; "his daughter is a beautiful girl."
"And his son?"
"Is a loggerhead."
At these words, a furious anger, flashed over Hannah's face, and,
glaring fiercely on Florence for a moment, she darted from the room and
slammed the door behind her. The young girl turned the key, saying, "I'm
glad to be rid of her hateful presence. What possessed her to come here
is more than I can tell." And in the surprise this unusual visit
occasioned, she retired and forgot her journal.
"A mien that neither seeks nor shuns
The homage scattered in her way;
A love that hath few favored ones,
And yet for all can work and pray.
A smile wherein each mortal reads
The very sympathy he needs;
An eye like to a mystic book,
Of lays that bard or prophet sings,
Which keepeth for the holiest look
Of holiest love, its deepest things."
What an impetus was given to the cause of Woman's Rights, when the first
Bloomer stepped upon the stage! With what tremendous huzzas of triumph
and victory did the whole assaulting sisterhood mount the breaches thus
made in the great bulwarks of man's tyranny and despotism; infuriately
calling on every woman throughout the length and breadth of the nation
to rise in the might of her slumbering strength, make her petticoats
into pillars of defiance, and hurl them on the weak, unguarded outposts,
till the whole tottering fabric should go down with a crash to rise no
more.
Mrs. Pimble and her coadjutors commenced rolling the ball of reform
with increased velocity. Mass meetings, of the most boisterous and
denunciatory character, were held through the community. It appeared a
war was commenced which threatened to cease only with the extermination
of the masculine portion of Wimbledon. Mr. Salsify Mumbles, though as
brave as most men in common encounters, was afraid to step outside his
door lest his unmentionables should be seized by some of the new-fledged
manhood, and a petticoat tied to his coat-tail. Even the green damask
curtains and cushion-coverings that adorned the high, old-fashioned
pulpit of the village church, were voted as ostentatious and calculated
to foster luxurious idleness in the pastor; and a committee appointed
and authorized to tear them from their places and sew them into bloomers
for the comfort of the lady-lecturers, whose callings exposed them to
the most inclement weathers. And so green-legged Philanthropy stalked
through Wimbledon; but it never laid an armful of wood on the sill of
Dilly Danforth's humble abode, though rough blew the storms of the
inclement winter; nor did it put a cap over Master Willie's curly locks,
or sew a charitable patch on the elbow of his ragged jacket. Because it
was philanthropy in the wider sense, which sought to relieve in the sum
of thousands--not of units.
Mrs. Dr. Simcoe figured not so largely among the sisterhood of reformers
as she would have done had she not been encumbered by "Simcoe's
children," who were two of the most ill-natured, uncompromising
offshoots of barbarism that ever tormented a meek, unoffending woman.
Mrs. Lawson thought some reformer should arise to fill the place so
nearly vacated by the persecuted lady, and fixed upon Mrs. Edson as her
successor.
So, on a day, Mrs. Lawson, in green damask bloomers, black overcoat, and
deer-skin gloves, appeared on the steps of Mrs. Edson's mansion, and
gave a herculean pull at the door-bell which brought the master of the
house instanter, with staring eyes, to answer the pealing summons. "I
believe Mrs. Edson resides here," said the lady-reformist, looking
loftily upon the man, who was evidently very much struck with his
visitor's personal equipments.
"She does," answered he, at length.
"I have come to hold a conversation with her," said Mrs. Lawson,
stamping the snow from her boots, and proceeding toward the open door of
the sitting-room.
Louise rose as she entered, glanced at the strange figure, then at her
husband, and then back to the figure again, with an amusing expression
of wonder on her beautiful features.
"I do not know this--this person's name," said he, at length.
"Lawson--Mrs. Portentia Lawson!" said the lady-reformist, laying her
walking-stick on the piano, and unbuttoning her over-coat. "I am
actively engaged in the benevolent enterprises of the day, and have come
to obtain your aid and cooeperation, madam." Here she made a low
inclination toward Louise.
"My wife does not meddle in such matters," said Mr. Edson, simply. "I
pay a stated sum yearly toward the support of the gospel, and give as
much as people in general to the missionary and Bible societies."
"It is nothing to me," said Mrs. Lawson, turning sharply upon the
speaker, "what you give to support the gospel, or to endow Bible
societies. I have nothing to do with such milk-sop organizations, or the
donkeys that draggle at their heels. Other and loftier objects engage my
attention and claim my powers. My business is not with you, sir! It is
with the woman who condescends to acknowledge you as her husband!"
Having delivered herself of the preceding harangue, Mrs. Lawson turned
her attention to Louise, and vouchsafed no further notice of Mr. Edson,
who soon slunk out of the room and returned to his counter.
"I suppose you are not wholly ignorant of the reform the more talented
of your sex are making efforts to effect in the social condition of
Wimbledon," remarked the nimble-tongued Mrs. Lawson to her fair auditor,
who was sitting in a low rocking-chair before the glowing grate, with
her tiny, slippered-feet poised on the fender.
"Yes!" answered she, purposely ignorant. "I am confined at home by my
duties as a wife, and know very little of what is passing around me."
Mrs. Lawson proceeded to give a detailed account of the labors of a
small band of enfranchised females for the liberation of their enslaved
and suffering sisters, whose weakness and timidity had hitherto
prevented their rising and throwing off the yoke of the oppressor, man.
So eloquently did she rehearse her tale, so still and patient was her
listener, that she felt confident of gaining a new coaedjutor in the
ranks of female reform. As she finished her recital, she directed a
sharp, piercing glance toward Mrs. Edson, whose calm, clear eyes and
placid face evinced no disturbing emotions.
"Will you join our ranks?" demanded Mrs. Lawson, "and aid us in rending
the fetters forged on woman's wrists by the tyrant man?"
"No!" said Louise, in a quiet but determined tone.
"Then you do not believe in Woman's Rights!" said Mrs. Lawson, half her
enthusiasm falling off and leaving her coarse features blank and bare.
"O, yes!" answered Louise, her face brightening as she spoke, "I believe
in Woman's Rights with all my heart and soul. Yet not in crowds, and
camps, and forums, where swarming multitudes are jostling to and fro;
and brawls, and shouts, and loud harangues make tumult in the air, do I
believe she finds her proper sphere. Not in halls of legislation, or
among empannelled juries, or yet within the sacred desk, would I behold
the form of woman. No, no! what sight so revolting to a refined
soul--whether it dwell in male or female bosom--as unsexed womanhood,
booted and spurred, parading over rostrums, brawling in debates, and
spouting sophistical sentiments on subjects of whose true signification
they are as ignorant as an idiot of the laughter and derision his babble
excites? O, 'tis woman's thrice-beautiful right to relieve and succor
the care-worn and distressed, wherever on this goodly earth they fall
within the circle of her sphere and influence! To give sweet,
unobtrusive charities to the children of want! By gentle words of
sympathy and hope, to raise and cheer the drooping souls of her erring
sisters; and in dim-lighted rooms, where restless disease tosses on
couches of pain and agony, 'tis hers to move with noiseless tread, to
smooth the pillow, bathe the brow, and give the healing potion! Say not
her sphere is limited, her influence small, her mission low, or her
rights unacknowledged."
Louise rose as she proceeded, her face glowing with the sentiments she
uttered. Mrs. Lawson stood before her, moving backwards gradually, till
she finally receded through the open door, took to the street, and was
seen no more in the home of Louise Edson.
"Babies are very well when they don't cry,
But when they do, I choose not to be nigh;
For of all awful sounds that can appal,
The most terrific is a baby's squall;
I'd rather hear a panther's hungry howl,
Or e'en a tiger's deep, ferocious growl,
Than sit in chimney-corner 'neath my hat,
And list the screechings of an irate brat."
We thought we would go to Mrs. Stanhope's this cold, starry, winter
evening, but on passing the parlor windows of Dea. Allen's cottage, the
curtains being yet undrawn, we distinguished, by the blazing firelight
within, the form of that good lady, and also that of her maiden sister,
Miss Martha Pinkerton, both sitting at the family table, drinking tea
with the good deacon and his amiable spouse. Amy Seaton and Charlie were
there, too, but we missed the laughing face of Jenny Andrews, and Mrs.
Allen said she was gone on a sleighing excursion, which a number of the
young people of Wimbledon were enjoying, this fine, bright evening.
"I want to know," asked Miss Pinkerton, sipping her bohea, "if you
believe there's any truth in the report of Florence Howard's engagement
with Rufus Malcome, Mrs. Allen?"
"Well, I never thought much about the matter," returned that
mild-visaged lady. "The young people's affairs don't interest me
particularly. The two families are quite intimate. We have the Malcomes
at our next door, and can't well avoid seeing a large number of their
visitors, as they come and go."
"Col. Malcome is a very gentlemanly man," remarked Mrs. Stanhope, as
they were rising from the table.
"Yes," said the good deacon, wiping his face with a yellow silk
handkerchief; "but sometimes I fear he is not the Christian he should
be. He never goes to church, and every Sunday that wicked-looking woman
of Major Howard's is there the whole day, racketing about with Rufus and
the servants. I don't think a peaceable, pious man would counsel such
doings, for my part."
"That Hannah Doliver at Col. Malcome's every Sabbath?" said Miss
Pinkerton, opening wide her large, light eyes; "I don't see what she
does there; really, the impudence of some people is astonishing. 'Tis
likely she wants to see all she can and gossip about the colonel's
affairs."
Nobody replied to this pert speech of Miss Martha's, and Mrs. Stanhope
resumed the conversation by giving a brief account of Mrs. Lawson's
discomfiting attempt to convert Mrs. Louise Edson into a reformer; she
having received an amusing description of the scene from Louise's own
lips. This was exciting considerable merriment among the group, when
there came a rap on the door, and Mrs. Salsify Mumbles entered with her
daughter, Mary Madeline; the latter carrying a bundle in her arms.
Before the salutations were fairly over, said bundle began to squeal,
and on removing several yellow flannel blankets, a baby was discovered
of nearly the same hue as the shawls which had enveloped it.
And the baby became the toast on all sides; as what baby does not, when
making its debut among strangers? Mrs. Allen said it was the image of
its grandma, whereupon Mrs. Salsify laughed and looked supremely silly.
The deacon patted its back and said, "Poor little innocent! what a world
of sin and misery it has come into!"
Mrs. Stanhope said it appeared very strong of its age, and Miss
Pinkerton gave it a hasty, expressive glance, which spoke _her_ opinion
more eloquently than words could have done.
Amy and Charlie approached in their turn, and, gazing on it, exclaimed,
innocently,
"What a _funny thing_!"
Verily, there was more truth than fiction in these words. It certainly
_was_ a funny thing. On the crown of its long, bare, peaked head, stuck
one of the little, furbelowed caps we once saw Mrs. Salsify engaged in
making, which was tied down over its flapping ears with orange-colored
ribbon. A receding forehead, little specs of eyes, a turned-up nose, and
great blubber lips, adown whose corners flowed eternally two miniature
cataracts. O, what a face! Surely, nobody but a grandmother would be
pleased to have it said to resemble theirs. 'Twas such a scowling,
uncomfortable-looking baby, and had such a shrill, piercing squeal for a
cry; for all the world like a miniature porker. Mary Madeline tossed it
up and down in her arms, trotted it on her knee, but still it squealed,
and Mrs. Salsify said it was squealing for its father; it always did so
when it was carried away from him, and they should have to take it home.
So they bundled off, and then Miss Martha spoke. "It was strange people
would carry their squalling brats into their neighbors' houses to annoy
them."
"Children are usually more trouble among strangers than at home," Mrs.
Allen remarked.
Then Charlie Seaton said, "Willie Danforth told him it was always
squealing when he passed Mr. Salsify's, which was several times a day,
on his way to and from the seminary; and he thought they kept a pig in
their parlor, till one day he saw the baby's face at the window, and
discovered the sounds proceeded from its noisy throat."
"How happens it that Willie Danforth goes to school at the seminary,
when his mother is so poor?" asked Miss Pinkerton.
"Willie says his mother found a paper on her door-sill one morning,"
answered Charlie, "and on opening it several bank-notes fell out. On the
paper was written, 'Use these for William's tuition at the seminary.' So
he is going to school till the money is spent."
"Well, I declare," said Miss Martha, "that was a strange incident. Does
Mrs. Danforth know who left the money?"
"She thinks it was the same one who leaves little bundles of sticks at
her door, every now and then," answered Charlie.
"Well, who is that?" inquired Miss P.
"O, she don't know," returned the lad.
"I am glad some kind soul remembers the poor widow," said Mrs. Allen;
"for I have often feared many of us were too neglectful of the lone
woman."
"You know, wife," said the deacon, "what sad reports we heard of her
hypocrisy; how she assumed an appearance of extreme poverty to create
sympathy and wheedle people into deeds of false benevolence. I do not
think such sinfulness should be countenanced."
"I know such reports were spread abroad concerning her," remarked Mrs.
Stanhope; "but I never could trace them to any other source than that
ranting, blustering Mrs. Pimble."
"What! that brawling, fanatical, crazy-pated, man-woman?" exclaimed the
deacon, vehemently; "pray, don't mention her. The wrath of God will fall
upon her and all the guilty brood who have desecrated His sanctuary, by
tearing down its curtains and converting them into garments to serve
Satan in." The excitable deacon was waxing warm, when his wife gave him
a conjugal nudge, and he held his peace.
"From the hour by him enchanted,
From the moment when we met;
Henceforth by one image haunted,
Life may never more forget.
All my nature changed--his being
Seemed the only source of mine.
Fond heart, hadst thou no foreseeing
Thy sad future to divine?"
Florence Howard sat in a deep-cushioned fauteuil, beside a marble table
which graced the centre of the elegant apartment she called her own. A
loose robe, of India cashmere, in superb colors, with a lining of the
softest, rose-colored velvet, was folded carelessly about her graceful
form. One white hand toyed with the luxuriant chestnut curls, that hung
in beautiful profusion over her shoulders; the other rested lightly on
the cushioned arm of the chair. A quantity of rich writing materials
were spread out on the table before her; but she glanced towards them
listlessly, and at length bowed her queenly head between her hands, and
sat a long time still and silent, as if absorbed in reverie. Ever and
anon her little foot tapped impatiently the soft carpet beneath it, as
though some harassing, unpleasant vision disturbed her brain. The clear,
ringing chimes of the college clock finally aroused her to
consciousness.
Rising, she drew aside the heavy folds of the damask curtain, and gazed
for a moment forth on the sleeping earth. The stars were bright, and a
slender crescent rim hung just above the dark cedar forest that swept
and swayed to the northward. Florence dropped the curtain, and,
returning to the table, opened a large morocco-bound volume, which
revealed a virgin page. Twirling the silver top from a carved, mosaic
inkstand, she dipped the golden tips of a pearl-handled pen in its ebon
contents, and holding it between her small, taper fingers, rested her
arm a few moments on the stand, as if waiting for her thoughts to form
and arrange themselves ere she gave them expression. Suddenly the pen
dashed off, and line after line of graceful characters grew on the pure,
white page till it was completely filled.
"I have looked out on the midnight," she wrote, "with all its countless
diamonds blazing on its brow; and far on the verge of the northern
horizon hung the pale disc of the young crescent moon hurrying to
obscure itself behind the dark, gloomy forest,--like as my hopes fail
when I turn my eyes toward those cedar-tops. O, earth, how soon thy
children learn the lesson of sorrow and distrust! But where is my old
pen taking me this evening? This journal grows a sad, ghostly thing,
o'ersplashed with tears, and wo-fraught to the edges.
"To turn the subject: What have I done to-day? Moped dismally till
evening, and then muffled myself in furs; sat down among cushions and
buffalo robes in the omnibus-sleigh, beside ----, shall I write it? yes!
beside Rufus Malcome, and dashed away over the snow-clad earth to the
music of merry bells and merrier voices around me.
"How finely Jenny Andrews and Richard Giblet enjoyed themselves! I
understood their happiness well. Mrs. Edson was not quite so buoyant
with spirits as usual; but she conversed with Rufus in her charming
style. I was quite indignant to hear so much eloquence and refinement
wasted on a churl like him, and just malicious enough to think the fair
speaker would have preferred to say her pretty things in the ear of one
who could have better appreciated their worth and beauty, namely, Col.
Malcome. He is really a splendid man, though I hardly relish the power
he seems to exercise over father, who is so infatuated with him I
believe he would scarcely be able to refuse any request he might choose
to make. I wonder so talented a father should own a dolt like Rufus for
a son. Silly-pated fellow! he has made love to me several times. I say
_made_ it, and truthfully; for no such simpleton as he could ever
actually _feel_ it in their bosoms. But then, no doubt, he thinks he is
in love,--desperately so. I have no pity for him; nothing but contempt,
and yet, should he propose for me to my father, I fear the result would
be his acceptance. He has wealth and position, and I know father has a
suspicion that I have yet a lingering recollection of the hermit's boy,
as he calls Edgar. O, name of all others! Have I dared write it in full
on these pages? I must draw an obscuring line over it. There! Now,
'One last, long sigh to hope and love,
Then back to busy life again.'"
While Florence was occupied with her journal in the room above, Col.
Malcome sat with her father in the parlor below, and that which she had
feared might some time come to pass had actually occurred; and when she
nestled down on her soft pillow and sank to sleep, if her slumbers were
not tranquil and dreamless, they were sweeter than any she might know
for many a weary night to come; for she slept in blissful ignorance that
she was the affianced bride of Rufus Malcome. Early on the following
morning her father imparted to her the dismal intelligence.
"I have accepted him," said Major Howard, "on the conditions that the
engagement shall remain a secret between the families, and the union not
be consummated for at least one year, as you are both young. Col.
Malcome will give his son fifty thousand dollars on his marriage, and
also a splendid situation wherever he chooses to reside."
He ceased, and Florence remained silent and abstracted.
"This will be a match suitable for my daughter," said the fond father,
approaching and laying his hand affectionately on her bowed head. "Does
she not agree with me?"
Florence lifted her face; the light seemed suddenly to have gone out of
her eyes and left them in utter darkness. No tinge of color glowed on
her features, which worked with painful and scarcely suppressed emotion.
The father started back on beholding her. "My child!" he exclaimed,
"what is the matter?"
"Leave me alone, father, I entreat of you!" she said.
"Not till you tell me what is distressing you so," said he, chafing her
cold hands in his. "Is this engagement so repulsive, so averse to your
feelings, as to cause this appearance of agony and distress?"
But she only said, "Leave me, dear father, I entreat you, for a while! I
have a sudden illness. By and by I will speak to you."
Awed by her tone and manner, the fond father obeyed. An hour passed by,
during which the grief-stricken girl never moved, when the door opened,
and Hannah Doliver entered. She glowered on Florence with an expression
of hate and gratified revenge, which changed to one of fawning fondness
when the pale, tear-stained face was turned toward her. "Pray, don't sit
here in the cold all day!" said she. "Your mother desires you to come to
her."
Florence wrapped her rich dressing-gown around her, stole down the
stairs and entered the apartment of the invalid, who reached her wasted
arm from the bed as she approached, and clasped it round the slender,
graceful waist. The young girl bowed her head on the pillow, and burst
into tears.
"He held a letter in his withered hand
Which brought good tidings of the absent one.
O, what soul-cheering things are letters, when
They come fresh from the hand of one we love,
All brimming o'er with kindly-uttered words!"
The wailing winds swept onward with low and piteous sound, while the
"Hermit of the Cedars" sat beneath his humble roof, beside a rough
table, and, by the light of a tallow candle, pored over a
closely-written page. In the recess of the small window, a bright-haired
boy was sitting, very like the dreamy Edgar who sat there in summers and
seasons passed by, and watched the stars gleaming, like showers of
diamonds, through the interlacing forest-boughs. But it was not Edgar,
for he was far away, storing his mind from the mines of ancient lore.
It was our little friend, Willie Danforth, the washerwoman's boy, for
whom the hermit had taken a large fancy since Edgar left him, and often
coaxed him from his mother to pass a few nights at the hut in the
forest. Willie, as we see him now, in the place where we were wont to
behold Edgar, is certainly wonderfully like him; and so thought Florence
Howard, when she saw the tall, graceful youth, in the same morocco cap
and blue frock coat Edgar used to wear, wending his way past her
father's mansion to the seminary on the hill. She sought to learn his
name; and some person, not very well informed, said 'twas William
Greyson, another foundling of that strange hermit's.
But we wander from the lonely man, who still pores over the sheet he
holds in his attenuated fingers. It is a letter from Edgar Lindenwood.
"Dear, dear uncle," it runs, "gladly I turn from musty tomes of olden
time lore, to give to you the star-lit midnight hour. Fancy, on airy
pinions, flits away over mountain-top and valley, and rests upon that
long arm of the tall linden, that stretches close to your lowly window,
and gazes through the narrow panes on your dear form, bending over some
treasured volume, or sitting, with bowed head, before a blazing fire,
lost in reveries of thought and contemplation. You express a fear that I
may have deemed you arbitrary and severe in the control sometimes
exercised over my humors and inclinations. Your fear is groundless,
uncle. Though some of your commands may have cost me a struggle ere I
could unmurmuringly obey, I have too high an estimate of your judgment
and discrimination to rebel against an authority I feel is grounded in
reason, and only exercised for my benefit and welfare in future life.
"I remember a tale, my mother oft breathed in my infantine ears, of a
bright star that once skirted the literary horizon, and ere long darkly
disappeared; of a lofty, sensitive nature, that met a staggering blow,
and reeled to earth, no more to soar aloft. And, though I have never
known the details of that early disappointment, I regard, with
overflowing reverence, sympathy, and devotional affection, the suffering,
uncomplaining heart that struggles silently on, with its wreck of
youthful hopes and aspirations.
"Shall I tell you, uncle, my university life promises to be a brief one?
You will think it augurs badly for the erudition of the faculty of this
institution, when I inform you that they have placed me among the senior
class, which will graduate in the coming spring. Then I propose to take a
brief tour of travel, and amuse myself by sketching from the beautiful
scenery of this country. I find the passion for art increases with my
years. Once I wished to be a poet, but now the painter's pencil yields me
most delight.
"Ere long I hope to return to that home among the Cedars, and sit down to
quiet evenings by my dear uncle's side, with no sound in our ears save
the eternal roar of the mighty forest winds.
"Far from experiencing a jealous pang, I rejoice to learn you have found
an object of interest in the youth you have taken under your care. May he
prove a grateful companion to your solitude, is the sincere wish of,
Yours, most truly, EDGAR."
Such were the contents of the letter which the hermit perused several
times ere he folded it, and turned his attention to the boy, who was
still sitting by the small window, gazing forth into the windy night.
"William," said he--and the lad approached.
Something seemed trembling on the thin lips of the recluse which he
hesitated to reveal. At length, as if suddenly changing his purpose, he
said: "Do you think your mother is comfortable, to-night, my boy?"
"O, yes, sir!" answered Willie, "the large bundle of sticks you left at
her door yesterday evening will keep her warm for several days."
"I hope they may," returned the hermit; "'tis a sad thing to be poor,
Willie, but 'tis a sadder thing to be wicked."
"You do not think my mother is wicked, do you?" asked the boy, turning
his blue eyes quickly on the hermit's countenance.
"Why do you ask?" said he, returning Willie's startled glance with a
grave smile.
"Because I knew Mr. Pimble's folks said harsh things of her, and I
didn't know but you believed them, as you never chose to enter our
humble abode."
"My gloomy disposition is averse to intercourse with the generality of
my species," returned the hermit, in a solemn tone; "nor do I ever heed
or hear the tales and gossipings of idle lips. In the last ten years I
have held no converse with any human beings, save you and your ---- and
my nephew, Edgar Lindenwood."
Willie gazed on the strange man before him in silent awe. "Has your
mother ever expressed a wish to see me?" inquired the hermit, after a
pause.
"Often," said Willie.
"For what purpose?" demanded the recluse, in a quick, sudden tone,
looking eagerly on the boy's face.
"To thank you for all your kindness to her," replied the lad,
ingenuously.
"O, yes!" returned the solitary man, his features relapsing into their
usual placid serenity. "I wish not, nor deserve, her thanks for the
humble charities given. Let us seek our couch, my boy."
"Have you another name than William?" he asked, as they were lying down.
"Yes," answered the youth; "William Ralph is my name,--the first for my
father, the second for an uncle who went to distant countries, ere I can
remember, and has never been heard of since."
"Was the uncle your father's or mother's brother?" inquired the hermit,
in a careless tone.
"My mother's. Ralph Greyson was his name."
"And does your mother appear to mourn his loss, or wish for his return?"
said the hermit, still in the same careless, half-absorbed tone of
voice.
"She speaks pityingly of him sometimes, for he was a bright, promising
youth, she says, when one distressful circumstance crushed his hopes and
ruined his usefulness; but I do not think she desires his return, for he
left his native shores cursing her as the cause of his misfortunes."
"Ah! how had she caused his misfortunes?" asked the hermit, drowsily.
"By marrying below her sphere," said Willie, in a trembling, embarrassed
tone; "a man who proved a vulgar sot, and thus disgracing him in the
eyes of a proud family, with whom he sought an alliance."
As Willie ceased speaking, the hermit breathed heavily, as if in deep
sleep; so, turning his face to the cedar-plaited wall, the lad was soon
wrapped in his own sweet, youthful slumbers.
"Wasting away--away--away,
Slowly, silently, day after day.
Fainter, and fainter and fainter the flow,
Of the current of life more sluggish and slow,
And a ghastly glare in the glassy eye,
And the wan cheek tinged with a hectic dye."
In the dim gloom of a soft spring evening, a slender, graceful form bent
silently over a low, curtained couch, gently fanning the annoying
insects from the pale brow of its slumbering occupant. The apartment was
furnished with almost princely magnificence. Curtains of the richest
blue-wrought damask, hung in massy folds from ceiling to floor, before
the deep bay-windows. Rosewood sofas and fauteuils, in costly coverings
of the same soft color, rested on the brilliantly interwoven flowers of
the Persian carpet, whose velvety softness echoed not the slightest
tread. A fairy chandelier hung suspended from the lofty, corniced
ceiling. Rare statuary decorated the mantel. Large mirrors and pictures
in broad gilt frames adorned the walls. Marble stands, covered with
deep-fringed cloths of gold, on which lay books in superb bindings,
graced the several corners, and the carved mahogany bedstead, behind
whose ample curtains of azure velvet the sleeper reposed, among
white-piled cushions of softest down, vied in elegant luxury with the
couch of an eastern princess. And there, with one white, wasted arm
thrown above the head, all shorn of its bright wealth of auburn curls,
and the other concealed 'neath the silken coverings, lay Edith Malcome,
the blue veins almost starting from her pale brow, and a bright crimson
spot on the sunken cheek. Alas, that earth's most lovely should fall the
earliest victims to the withering hand of disease! The door did softly
asunder, and her father entered. With an expression of deep care and
suffering depicted on his handsome features, he approached the bed-side.
"Is she still sleeping?" demanded he, in a whisper which would have been
inaudible to an ear less quick than that of the silent watcher.
"She is," was the ready answer, in the same hushed tone. He gazed
intently for several moments on the attenuated form before him, while
every variety of expression passed over his countenance.
"If she dies," said he, at length, in a voice broken with grief, "what
will be left on earth to me?"
The watcher was deeply affected by his grief-stricken appearance. "O,
speak not thus!" she said, bursting into tears. "She will not die; the
doctor has given us better hopes to-day. But even if she were to be
taken to her home in the skies, you must not say there's nothing left on
earth for you. You, so bright in soul and intellect, surrounded by
admiring friends and all the luxuries of princely wealth, with a son to
perpetuate your name"----
"Say no more," interrupted the afflicted man. "I cannot endure your
words."
Louise was grieved to see she had only wounded where she meant to
soothe, and, with a gentle, impulsive movement, placed her hand on the
soft black curls of the head that was bowed among the cushions of the
bed, and said, "Forgive me, I meant not to afflict."
Silently he took the little hand in his, and placed it on his throbbing
temples. Louise trembled.
"Your brow is feverish," said she at length, seeking an excuse to
withdraw the imprisoned hand; "let me bathe it in some cooling lotion."
"No," said he, "this moist little palm is better than any lotion," still
detaining it, as she sought to reach the stand which contained a
quantity of vials on a silver tray. The slight movements aroused Edith.
Opening her large, spiritual eyes, she gazed up in the faces of the
watchers at her bed-side, with a vague, dreamy expression.
"Don't you know me, Edith?" asked her father, bending quickly over her.
"O, yes, father!" answered she faintly; "and that lady is my mother,"
she added, staring confusedly upon Louise, as if not yet in full
possession of her waking faculties.
Louise looked embarrassed, and the colonel hastened to say, "That is
Mrs. Edson, my dear, who watches with you to-night. You are wandering a
little, I fear."
"Well, where is my mother, then?" continued Edith, in the same strange
manner, which appeared to agitate her father deeply.
"My child," said he, in a soothing tone, "have I not often told you your
mother died when you was a very little girl?"
"I don't know," said Edith, "but last night I dreamed she came with a
pale face and bloody lips and stared so mournfully upon me. I wish you
would go and bring her to me, father."
"My daughter, do I not tell you she is in her grave?" said the father,
trembling with emotion. "How can I bring her to you?"
"Hannah Doliver told Rufus she would come if you would let her,"
continued the sick girl, in a reproachful tone, apparently not
understanding her father's words.
On hearing this, Col. Malcome started with a violent exclamation, which
alarmed Edith, and brought her at once into full possession of her
senses. Louise, who had marked, with her quick eye, the colonel's
strange excitement, approached and administered a reviving cordial to
the invalid. The father soon retired, leaving the watcher alone with her
charge.
As the hours dragged slowly on, many were the thoughts which passed
through Mrs. Edson's active brain, as to the cause of Edith's singular
words, and the anger and excitement evinced by her father. At length the
gray morning dawned, and Sylva, Edith's attendant, appeared to relieve
the watcher from her post.
As Louise was passing through the hall to gain the street, the door
suddenly opened, and Col. Malcome entered in cap and overcoat. He paused
and inquired if his daughter had passed a comfortable night, and, on
receiving an affirmative answer, proceeded to the drawing-room.
"The old days we remember;
How softly did they glide!
While, all untouched by worldly care,
We wandered side by side.
In those pleasant days, when the sun's last rays
Just lingered on the hill;
Or the moon's pale light, with the coming night,
Shone o'er our pathway still.
"The old days we remember,
O, there's nothing like them now!
The glow has faded from our hearts,
The blossom from the bough.
A bitter sigh for the hours gone by,
The dreams that might not last;
The friends deemed true when our hopes were new,
And the glorious visions past."
Rufus Malcome, as the accepted suitor of Florence, paid regular visits
to her father's mansion. Great was the glee of Hannah Doliver to behold
the young couple together; and great the nervous disquiet evinced by the
invalided Mrs. Howard when she was aware of the young man's presence in
the house. She had never met him, as her health, which had in the last
six months rapidly declined, confined her now entirely to her room, and
indisposed her more strongly than ever to behold strange faces.
The only person she had ever been known to express a wish to see, since
her residence in Wimbledon, was Edith Malcome,--a wish excited, perhaps,
by Florence's warm praises of the grace and beauty of her young friend,
who was as different from Rufus, she said, "as a sweet pink from an
odious poppy."
But Edith, strange as it may appear, had never visited at the Howards',
though often warmly invited by the whole family.
The colonel invariably excused her in his easy, graceful manner, saying
she was "a timid little thing, and dreaded to go for a moment from her
father's side." Latterly, her illness had been sufficient reason for her
seclusion.
Florence was restricted from frequent visits to her sick friend by the
state of her own health, which had grown so feeble and delicate as to
alarm her father exceedingly. Dr. Potipher was consulted, and strongly
advised travel and change of scene as the most effectual remedy for the
feverish disease that seemed preying upon her constitution.
Major Howard was very willing to take his daughter on a tour of travel,
but knew not how to leave his invalid lady, whose strength he thought to
be gradually failing. She was far too low for him to indulge the idea of
making her one of the party, and he was about relinquishing the project
in despair, when, on mentioning the subject to the sick woman, great was
his surprise to find her even more anxious and earnest for his departure
than he was to go. She said "she should do very well without him,--she
always mended as summer approached, and Florence was drooping from long
and close confinement. She needed exercise and change of scene, and it
was his duty to do all in his power to restore her to health and
cheerfulness." Major Howard felt the only obstacle removed by the
invalid's assent and hearty cooeperation; so Florence was informed of the
project, and preparations immediately commenced for her tour.
It was a pleasant April evening as she sat in her luxurious apartment
with her journal open before her. "The last of these bright spring
evenings that I am to pass at home is closing in around me," she wrote.
"My trunks are packed and closed down, and to-morrow I am to start on a
tour of travel. How my long torpid bosom bounds at the thought! I shall
sail up that picturesque Hudson! I shall look on glorious Niagara! But I
fear my anticipations are too brilliant. Something will occur to dreg my
expected draught of happiness with sorrow. Thus it has ever been! Too
well I know I shall return to become the bride of one I detest; but I
will not let that thought embitter my enjoyment of the wonders and
beauties I shall behold. Besides, in so long a time as I shall be
absent, what may occur? Ah, I have written words that make me shudder! I
fear I may return to find the snows covering my mother's grave. Why do I
leave her? Is it not selfishness to allow her to urge me away when it is
her own generous care and affection for me which prompt her to do so?
There is something strange in the way she speaks of my matrimonial
engagement. I am sure it does not meet her approval, though she gave her
consent, as she always does to everything upon which father sets his
mind. She evidently dreads its consummation, perhaps because she has
discovered my aversion for the man I am to marry. As to Hannah Doliver,
she is wonderfully mollified toward me of late; but her fawning fondness
is more intolerable than her asperity and impertinence. Nothing seems to
delight her so much as to behold Rufus Malcome in company with me. I
caught her watching at the parlor-door this evening when he called in
company with his father to leave his adieus. She accompanied them to the
door and remained several minutes in conversation in the hall. I found
her in the kitchen a short time after, and she was muttering to herself
and slamming things about in a great rage. When she discovered me she
ceased, and grew suddenly as sunny as summer. She is a strange, dark,
intriguing woman, I fear, and wish we were well quit of her. I asked
mother if she had not better discharge her, and get a new person to
attend her during our absence; but she said, with a sudden expression of
alarm, 'O, no; she would not part with Hannah on any account!' So I said
no more, but fancied her preference was dictated more by fear than love.
But I spin out a long record for this last evening at home. O, budding
vines and flowers! who will train your rich luxuriance into fairy,
fantastic clusterings, or watch your opening petals in the summer which
is to come? Who listen to the babbling fountains, or roam the cedar-walks
that border the dancing river? And O, the far, far-stretching forest,
from whose mysterious depths, in a bright year passed away, I saw _him_
emerge, and hurried down the gravelled path to meet him at the
garden-gate, with happy, bounding heart! Will new scenes, however glad
and gay, e'er dim the memory of those dear times? Never!"
"It is a pleasant thing to roam abroad,
And gaze on scenes and objects strange and grand;
To sail in mighty ships o'er distant seas,
And roam the mountains of a foreign land."
In Mrs. Stanhope's pretty cottage, close by the vine-shaded window, sat
Jenny Andrews, and she said Florence Howard had started on a tour of
travel.
"Who is her companion?" asked Mrs. Stanhope.
"Why, Rufus Malcome, of course," said Miss Pinkerton, quickly.
"No," said Jenny, "her father."
"Her father!" exclaimed Miss Martha, in a tone of surprise. "How in the
world could he leave his sick wife, I should like to know?"
"Mrs. Howard is getting better, I believe," remarked Jenny.
"Well, that's strange enough," continued Miss Pinkerton; "with that
impudent Hannah Doliver for a nurse, I wonder she has not died before
now."
Hannah Doliver was Miss Martha's utter detestation, though why, we
cannot tell, as the little dark woman had never injured her, nor had
Miss Pinkerton ever exchanged above a dozen syllables with her in her
life. But it was one of those unaccountable dislikes which often arise
in people of certain temperaments, on first sight of a particular
individual.
Mrs. Stanhope said she was glad Florence had gone a journey, for the
dear girl had looked pale and sickly of late, and she thought change of
scene might be beneficial to her health.
Miss Martha inquired if Jenny knew how Edith Malcome was getting along.
"I have just come from her," said Jenny; "she is very much changed. All
her beautiful hair has been cut away, and she is, O, so thin and wasted!
But they call her slowly improving."
"Who takes care of her?" asked Miss P.
"Her waiting-woman, Sylva, I believe," returned Jenny.
"Well, it must be very hard for her to do it all the time," said Martha;
"if they would just ask me, I would go any time and assist them."
"Mrs. Edson is there considerable," remarked Jenny.
"I know she is; most too much for her credit," returned Miss Pinkerton;
"if a man has a wife, he wants her at home sometimes."
"Why, Martha!" observed Mrs. Stanhope, mildly; "I never heard a
reproachful word of Mrs. Edson breathed by any person."
"Neither did I," said Jenny, rising; "and if I do, I shan't believe it,
for I think she is the dearest, sweetest creature in the world."
"With the exception of one Mr. Richard Giblet," remarked Miss Pinkerton,
in a tone she conceived to be vastly witty and piquant.
Jenny's blush, as she bade good-morning, crowned the malicious maiden's
triumph.
On this same morning, Mrs. Edson sat at her elegant rosewood piano,
carelessly striking the ivory keys, when she heard a light footstep, and
turning, beheld Col. Malcome advancing to her side. She was a little
angry that he had entered unannounced, and her cheeks flushed, as she
rather briefly bade him welcome.
"I beg your pardon for entering so informally," said he, at once
interpreting the expression of her face. "Your doors were all ajar, and
I saw no one to announce me."
"Had you rung, some one would have appeared," said Louise, with a slight
curl of her red lip.
"Well, I beg your pardon for not doing so," returned he. "Will you grant
it?"
There was something in the rueful appearance he assumed, which forced
her to laugh in spite of her efforts at dignity and restraint, and thus
he was reinstated in her good graces.
"Are you playing?" he asked, touching his own fingers upon the keys, but
at a respectful distance from hers.
"No," she returned. "I have practised so little of late I have lost all
my ear. Won't you favor me with that thrilling piece from Beethoven, you
performed on the first evening of our acquaintance?" She looked eagerly
in his face as she spoke.
"What will you do for me if I will?" he asked.
"O, anything in my power!" she replied, rising, and motioning him to
assume the music-stool, which he did very readily. Skilfully running
over the keys, by way of prelude, while she stood leaning gracefully
against the instrument, intently regarding his movements, he commenced
the symphony. The swelling notes rose on the air in brilliant variety,
and when, at the end of the second chorus, the rich, mellow tones of his
voice were added, Louise dropped on her knees beside the performer,
while tears gathered in her eyes and rolled over her beautiful face. He
did not seem to heed her position, so intently was his soul occupied
with the music his lips were breathing. At length the last magic strain
died mournfully away. Then he rested his deep blue eyes calmly on her
glowing features.
"What shall I do for you?" she asked, smiling.
"You promised," answered he, "to do anything I wished, if I would sing
the piece."
"So I will," returned she, earnestly.
"Then," said he, in a low, thrilling tone, "as Steerforth said to David,
think of me at my best."
She looked at him eagerly. "Is that all?" she asked.
"That is enough," he answered; "will you promise _always_ to do that?"
She paused a few moments, and then answered, in a tone which indicated
her whole soul spoke in the words, "Yes, I promise."
"Thank you," said he, extending his hand.
She gave him hers. He held it a moment in his own. Then, pressing it
respectfully to his lips, bade her good-morning, and retired.
"And when in other climes we meet,
Some isle or vale enchanting,
And all looks flowery, wild and sweet,
And naught but love is wanting,
We think how blest had been our fate,
If Heaven had but assigned us
To live and die 'mid scenes like this,
With some we've left behind us."
Shout, reader, on the hill-tops of deliverance, for you and I are out of
Wimbledon. We have left behind us the Pimbles, the Mumbles, the Simcoes,
and their multitudinous voices grow indistinct in the distance, as,
borne by the rushing steam-steed, we fly on our way in search of our
fair traveller, who has got the start of us by several hours. We hardly
know whether to go up the Hudson, or hold straight on over the Erie road
for Niagara; but as we have no particular desire to see the former, our
remembrances of its picturesque scenery being marred by the unpleasant
circumstances under which we first beheld it, we incline to the latter
course.
So world-wondered-at Niagara shall be our destination, where Florence
Howard and her father are already arrived and installed occupants of a
regally-furnished suite of apartments at the Clifton House on the Canada
side of the river.
The new arrival had created quite a sensation; as new arrivals at these
fashionable watering-places, where the masses resort to display
themselves and behold and comment upon the display of others, always do.
As Florence, dressed with simple grace, leaned on the arm of her
noble-looking father, and entered the spacious dining-saloon, where
hundreds of both sexes, all flaunted out in the gayest and richest
attire, were already seated at the splendidly laid tables, every eye
levelled a critical glance on her garb and figure. Many an elegant lady,
in startling silks and astonishing ear-jewels, turned her nose sublimely
skyward and exclaimed "No great fetch,--these folks!" Gentlemen, in
surprising pants and prodigious vest buttons, said, with a princely
contempt, "Aw, an unsawphistawcated country gawl!"
But there were some, the precious few, who graced the saloons of the
Clifton House, not to gorge themselves on its spicy viands, or grow
inebriate over its sparkling wines, or yet to display their spindling
limbs encased in miraculous tights, their alarming waistcoats and
elephantine fob-chains; but who had come to look on and admire the
wonderful cataract, with its surrounding scenery of wildness and
grandeur; who marked the elegant bearing of an accomplished lady in the
sweet open countenance, simple dress, and graceful movements of the "new
arrival."
Florence seemed wholly regardless of the volleys of glances directed
toward her during the sumptuously-served dinner. She retired before
dessert, so great was her impatience of a nearer view of the sublime
spectacle visible from the piazzas of the Clifton House.
On Table Rock she stood, with her father's arm cast protectingly around
her, and gazed, tremulous with intense emotion, on the tremendous sweep
of rushing waters over the mighty horse-shoe fall, down, down forever,
upon the floods that boiled and surged like fathomless seas of angry
foam in the depths below. Then she turned to the lofty American fall,
spanned by its brilliant rainbow, like the bright wing of the Spirit of
the Waters cast beauteously o'er her stupendous creation of power and
sublimity.
Florence gazed till the shades of evening obscured the magnificent
scene, and then, clinging to her father's arm, returned to the hotel. On
gaining her room, she tossed off her bonnet and shawl and seized her
journal.
"Are you not going to tea?" asked her father.
"No," answered she, almost sharply. "I cannot so suddenly descend to the
actual, or come in so quick contact with the grossness of earth after
the god-like sublimity I have been contemplating."
Her father called her a little enthusiast, and walked away. Left to
herself she drew forth her journal.
"Eventful day!" she wrote. "I have stood among the mists of Niagara.
Fain would I voice the tumult flood of emotions that rushed over my soul
as I gazed on its wondrous sublimity: but language is impotent, and I am
weak,--weaker than usual; I think from reaction of my overstrained
powers.
"I could lie down and weep like a tired child. The tremendous roar of
the mighty waters is in my ear as I write. O, Niagara, Niagara! what
henceforth will be to me the brightest scene our country can afford--for
I have looked on thee, and what is left me now?"
She closed her book, and, stepping out on the piazza, leaned her arms
over the balustrade, and stood with her gaze riveted on the boiling
cataracts, now flashing like sheets of burnished silver in the soft
moonlight. While she was thus occupied a young lady approached and
accosted her.
"You are just arrived at the Falls, I fancy," said she, with a pleasant
smile.
"I arrived to-day," answered Florence, politely.
"You do not know me," remarked the young lady; "but I think I have seen
you before."
Florence gazed on the eloquent features, but she did not detect a
resemblance to any person she had ever known.
"You have the advantage of me," she said; "I do not recollect you."
"Probably not," returned the young lady; "but did you never reside in a
village called Wimbledon, at a beautiful mansion styled 'Summer House?'"
"I have just come from there," said Florence, gazing with surprise in
the face of her fair interrogator.
"So I thought," remarked the young lady, "and your name, excuse my
boldness, is Florence Howard. Mine is Ellen Williams. I once resided in
Wimbledon, and saw you several times at the village church. You,
probably, did not notice me, or, if you did, my features would be easily
forgotten. Not so yours. I recognized you the moment you entered the
dining hall. How do you like Niagara?"
"O, I am charmed, spell-bound!" exclaimed Florence. "Its glorious
sublimity thrills to the centre of my soul."
"Your enthusiasm reminds me of a young painter and poet we have had here
several weeks," said Miss Williams; "he left us only this morning. I was
down to the Suspension Bridge to-day, and read some verses he left in
pencil on the painted railings. His sketches of the Falls from different
points of view were very fine. He was very handsome, and had a sweet
name. I believe half the ladies were dead in love with him, but he never
bestowed a single encouraging glance on all their attempts to win his
favor."
"Quite an insensible young man, I should think," said Florence, smiling.
"What did you say was his name?"
"Lindenwood," returned Miss Williams. "I do not know whence he came, but
from some remote part of the country, I think."
Florence heard none of the young lady's words after the name was
mentioned, and it is difficult to say into what awkwardness her emotion
might have betrayed her, had not her father appeared at this juncture
and called her to her room. She recollected herself sufficiently to bid
good-evening to Miss Williams as she hastened away leaning heavily on
her father's arm.
Fastening her door, she dropped on a sofa, and exclaimed, "Alas, alas!
one day too late at Niagara."
"Flow on forever in thy glorious robe
Of terror and of beauty. Yea, flow on,
Unfathomed and resistless! God hath set
His rainbow on thy forehead, and the cloud
Mantled around thy feet.
Methinks, to tint
Thy glorious features with our pencil's point,
Or woo thee to the tablet of a song,
Were profanation."
Early the following morning Florence was astir, begging her father to
take her to the Suspension Bridge. She hardly glanced at the magnificent
appearance of the Canada fall, as the sunbeams changed its floods of
spray into bright showers of diamonds.
There she stood on the piazza, her cheeks flushed with vermilion, and
her dark eyes glowing with the animation and excitement within.
"I cannot take you to the bridge till after breakfast," said her father,
in reply to her urgent appeals to set out immediately.
"Must I wait so long?" said Florence dismally.
While the father and daughter stood debating the point, Florence's
acquaintance of the preceding day appeared, attended by a handsome young
man, whom she introduced as her brother Edward.
Major Howard recollected the Williams family, and seemed gratified to
renew his acquaintance.
"Col. Malcome occupies your old residence," said he to the young man, as
they left the ladies to themselves and walked to the opposite side of
the piazza.
After a pause, Florence asked her companion if she "had ever visited
Wimbledon since she left it."
"No;" answered the young lady, "though I have often desired to do so.
There was a poor washerwoman there, who had a little boy about my own
age, in whom I took a childish interest, and I would like much to learn
something of his fate."
"What was his name?" asked Florence.
"Willie Danforth," said Miss Williams.
"I know a washerwoman by the name of Dilly Danforth," returned Florence.
"That is his mother."
"I do not think she has a child," said Florence doubtfully.
"Then he is dead!" said Miss Williams in a trembling voice.
Florence pitied her emotion, and after a few moments said, "There is a
tall, graceful lad, I think they call Willie Greyson, who lives with the
strange forest-recluse, of whom you have heard, perhaps."
"Greyson!" repeated Ellen; "that I have heard was Mrs. Danforth's maiden
name; but Willie was never called so; besides, why should he leave his
mother to dwell with a hermit? O, no; my Willie must be dead! I said,
when I left him, I should never see him again." And the gentle girl
wiped a tear from her sweet blue eye.
The gentlemen now approached, and Major Howard invited the Williamses to
join them in their visit to the Suspension Bridge; but they had an
engagement with a party to visit Goat Island. Florence felt relieved to
hear this, for she preferred, for reasons of her own, to be attended by
no one but her father on the present excursion. They now descended to
the dining-hall, where an elegant breakfast was served. Florence ate but
a few tiny bits of a delicate crisp muffin, and sipped lightly at her
cup of fragrant Mocha. Her eager desire to gain the bridge destroyed all
relish for the dainty dishes spread in such variety and profusion before
her. At length her father announced a carriage in readiness. Hastily
folding a sheet of note-paper, and placing it in her pocket, she swung
her gold chain over her neck, to which was attached a richly-embossed
pencil, and followed him to the door. They were soon rolling away.
Florence saw nothing till they gained the bridge,--frail, trembling
thing, thrown at such dizzy height above the wild, rushing river. Her
father asked if she would ride or walk over. She would walk, and he
ordered the driver to halt. Assisting her from the carriage, they
stepped upon the swaying fabric. Florence kept close to the railings,
though he cautioned her to walk in the centre, and called her attention
to the fine view of the falls in the distance. But she did not notice
them, and, pausing suddenly, drew the sheet of note-paper from her
pocket and commenced writing.
"What are you doing?" said her father at length, noticing her head bowed
close to the railing.
"Wait a moment and I'll tell you," said she. "There! I believe I have
them all correct now. Shall I read them to you?"
"What are they?" asked he.
"Verses. I found them written in pencil on this painted strip."
"Are they worth reading?" inquired he, carelessly.
"O, yes!" she returned, earnestly. "Very pretty, I think!"
"Well, go on, then!" said he.
She commenced in a low tone, which grew in depth and sweetness as she
proceeded. Surely, if the author had never had the vanity to deem his
brief production possessed of merit, he would have grown into conceit of
it had he heard it falling so sweetly from those half-tremulous lips.
"Sea-green river, white and foamy,
Madly rushing on below;
While that fairy-looking fabric
Bends, and sways, and trembles so;
Fragile, frail and fairy fabric,
Boldly thrown so wildly high;
Wondrous work of art suspended
Midway 'twixt the earth and sky!
"Strong and firm the metal wires
Stretch to Canada's green shores;
As to link with bands of iron
Queen Victoria's realms to ours.
Passage-way for England's lion,
Unborn ages may it be;
While above him, in the ether,
Sails the Eagle of the Free!
"In the distance, dread Niagara,
Thing of wonder and of fear,
Pours its mighty flood of waters,
While the echoes soothe the ear.
Nature's wildest forms of beauty.
All around profusely thrown;
Bowing in her proudest temple,
Beggared Art, we humbly own!"
As Florence ceased she refolded the paper and placed it in her pocket.
"You did not read the author's name," said her father.
"There was no name attached to them," answered she. "Nothing, only some
initials which were rather indistinct."
"Some modest bard," remarked the major, as they retraced their steps to
the carriage, "who, as Byron says,
'Like many a bard unknown,
Rhymes on our names, but wisely hides his own.'
This poet sings of bridges, but does not sign his name to his songs."
Florence was silent during their drive to the hotel. Niagara seemed
suddenly to have lost its interest for her, and after a few more days
they departed, with young Williams and his lovable little sister in
their company.
"O, why should Heaven smile
On deeds of darkness--plots of sin and crime?
I cannot tell thee why,
But this I know, she often doeth so."
While the bright summer passed over Wimbledon, matters apparently moved
on as usual in the quiet little village.
The Woman's Rights Reform lagged somewhat with the thermometer at
eighty, as is frequently the case with benevolent organizations; perhaps
because their zealous warmth, when increased by a high-temperatured
atmosphere, mounts to spirits' boil and evaporates.
Mrs. Pimble and Mrs. Lawson sat on their respective piazzas, in nankin
pants and open waistcoats, and flapped great peacocks' tails to and fro,
to cool their feverish, perspiring brows.
Mr. Pimble, in his wife's sun-bonnet, clappered his heelless slippers at
mid-day along the garden paths, in the vain hope of warming his laggard
blood to a brisker flow. Mrs. Dr. Simcoe was still harassed by those
snarling, ill-tempered brats, "Simcoe's children," who seemed
contagiously disposed to all the "ills which flesh is heir to," as if to
test the skill and try the patience of the lady M. D.
One of the most brilliant moons that ever showered its silvery light
over a flower-covered earth, rode in the liquid zenith of a summer
heaven. The splendid grounds of Major Howard's princely mansion never
slept, in their luxuriant beauty, beneath a lovelier sky. Thick trailed
the heavy vines in their leafy exuberance of foliage over arbors and
green-houses. Whole parterres of brilliant flowers loaded the air with
fragrance, and nightingales sang among the boughs of the lindens that
waved against the wrought-iron palings of the terraces.
Was there aught save the breath of love and peace abroad on the air
to-night? Dared a vile vulture of sin to brush with polluting wing over
the vines and flowers of these odor-breathing, beam-lighted gardens?
There were low voices in one of the most obscure alcoves, and a man and
woman stood in close proximity in its dimmest recess.
A low sigh or sob now and then escaped the woman, as though she
struggled to suppress some choking emotion.
"Come," said the man at length, impatiently, "this blubbering will not
aid your purpose."
"O, Herbert!" she exclaimed, in a tone which entreated compassion, "you
have ceased to love me."
"Ceased to love you?" repeated he, with a low, ironical laugh, "I never
yet began."
"You told me so," said she.
"What if I did?" returned he; "is my veracity so immaculate that my
slightest word is received as an oath of probity? But I came not here to
keep a lover's tryst. You know, or at least I thought you knew, the bond
that unites us; and I ask you again if you will do my bidding and serve
my interests?"
"I have done both," said the woman; "but you have not fulfilled your
promises to me."
"Do you not see the boy when you choose?"
"I see him, but he does not recognize me."
"The better for you that he does not," returned the man. "Do you
suppose, with his position and prospects, he would acknowledge a low
serving-woman for a mother? He would kick her from his presence and
cover her with curses."
"And do you never intend to tell him who is his mother?" asked the
woman, in a trembling tone.
"Certainly not," answered he; "'tis not necessary the boy should know
his own disgrace; but when the proper moment arrives, there are those
who shall learn his parentage to their everlasting shame and
mortification."
"I see no prospect of that moment's ever arriving," said the woman.
"Here's the girl and her father gone off, the Lord knows where, or
whether they will ever return, and all things left unfinished and
incomplete. I must say you manage as an idiot."
"I will judge of my own management," said the man, fiercely. "There has
been sickness in my family, and other things have indisposed me to hurry
a revenge which will be the sweeter the longer 'tis delayed."
"But it may be so long delayed as to fail altogether," suggested the
woman.
"I'll take care of that," answered he. "I fancy I am not so great a
bungler as to overshoot my purposes and baffle my own designs; and,
woman," said he, raising his arm threateningly above her head, "I
caution you to beware. I believe you have already let drop some
unguarded words; else why is your mistress so averse to this engagement,
as I have learned she is, by the boy?"
The woman was silent. He seized her arm fiercely. "Have you blabbed?" he
hissed in her ear.
"No," answered she faintly, and struggling to free herself from his
grasp.
"Has she no suspicions of my proximity?" he demanded.
"None," returned the woman; "as I live she has none."
"Then I would look on her a moment to-night."
"That you can easily do," said she. "I left her sitting in a cushioned
seat, drawn close before an open casement, with the full moon shining on
her face."
"A lucky position! I will show myself to her in a few minutes," he
remarked, as the twain parted. Hannah Doliver proceeded rapidly up the
garden avenue to the mansion, and hurried to the apartment of her
mistress.
The invalid lady was sitting in the same position in which she had left
her an hour before.
"You have been absent a long time, Hannah," she observed in a languid
tone.
"I went as far as Col. Malcome's to learn if they had any recent
intelligence of Florence and her father," returned the woman, divesting
herself of bonnet and shawl.
"Well, had he any tidings of them?" inquired the invalid.
"At last accounts they were at Saratoga, intending in a few days to
start on a tour up the Hudson and St. Lawrence, to Quebec, and thence to
the mountain region of New Hampshire," answered the woman.
"Florence wrote to me from Niagara," remarked the lady; "she seemed in
fine spirits. I wonder if she corresponds with Rufus Malcome?"
"Of course," said Hannah; "a young lady would write to her affianced
husband, if she neglected all others." The invalid turned uneasily in
her chair at these words, and her waiting-woman went into an adjoining
apartment under pretence of performing some duty.
The lady sat listlessly gazing on the lovely scene without, when a dark
object moving up the garden path attracted her notice, and directly the
figure of a man in black, with cap removed from a head of
closely-trimmed auburn hair that clustered in short, thick masses of
luxuriant curls around a high, pale brow, appeared before the casement,
and fixed a bold stare upon her face. No sooner did her eyes encounter
those that glared so fiercely upon her, than she uttered a piercing
shriek, and fell back in her chair with the appearance of one from whom
all life had departed.
Hannah rushed into the room and bore the insensible form of her mistress
to the bed, where she commenced chafing her temples and pouring reviving
cordials down her throat. At length the frightened lady opened her eyes
and stared wildly around.
"Secure that casement," said she, pointing to the still open window;
"and shut all the doors and lock them."
"You will stifle without a breath of fresh air this oppressive night,"
grumbled Hannah, as she proceeded to execute the orders of her mistress.
"Better I should stifle," answered the excited and still trembling lady,
"than ever behold again the monster I have seen to-night."
"Heavens! what do you mean?" exclaimed the attendant, appearing to
experience the greatest emotion.
"I have seen _him_, Hannah Doliver," said the invalid, shuddering as she
spoke.
"Who?" asked the hypocritical woman, breathlessly.
"The destroyer of my happiness and your good fame," answered the lady.
"Impossible!" said Hannah, glaring on the excited features of the
prostrate form before her.
"I tell you I have seen him!" returned the invalid, shaking like an
aspen on her couch. "I cannot be mistaken. 'Twas his face; the high,
colorless brow, surrounded by thick, short auburn curls. He stood at
that casement, and gazed fiercely on me from his large, dark eyes."
"Pshaw!" said Hannah, "'twas but a hideous dream, or a sudden attack of
apoplexy. The man you fancy you have seen to-night, has not been heard
of these fifteen years, and is probably in his grave."
"Then it was his ghost that I saw," said the lady.
"May be it was," returned Hannah, smiling strangely; "though I don't
know why it should have honored you with a visit. I am glad I was not
deemed worthy his ghostship's regards."
The affrighted lady after a while grew calmer, and Hannah retired to her
own apartment, which joined that of her mistress.
In a few days, a letter was despatched to Major Howard by the invalid,
informing him of the strange appearance which had alarmed her, and
urging his immediate return.
The letter never reached its destination.
"Ask why the holy starlight, or the blush
Of summer blossoms, or the balm that floats
From yonder lily like an angel's breath,
Is lavished on such men! God gives them all
For some high end; and thus the seeming waste
Of her rich soul--its starlight purity,
Its every feeling delicate as a flower,
Its tender trust, its generous confidence,
Its wondering disdain of littleness,--
These, by the coarser sense of those around her
Uncomprehended, may not all be vain."
A jubilant party were assembled in Mrs. Leroy Edson's elegant parlors to
witness the marriage ceremony of Jenny Andrews and Richard Giblet.
Even Mrs. Salsify, as one of the groom's former acquaintances, received
an invite to the bridal feast, and appeared in red morocco shoes and a
cap whose ruffles were the astonishment of the entire assembly. Mary
Madeline's squealing baby detained her at home, and perhaps, also, she
did not care to see her former lover, recreant and unfaithful though he
had been to her, take the solemn vow of eternal constancy to another.
The party was more lively than wedding parties usually are. Mrs. Edson
was everywhere, gliding, like the spirit of grace and beauty, among her
guests, enlivening them by her humor, and spreading a rich glow of
geniality through the apartments. If she ever outshone herself, and
surpassed her own surpassing powers, it was to-night. Col. Malcome's
eyes followed her wherever she moved, with an undisguisable expression
of admiration. He seemed rather cast in the shade by her unwonted
brilliancy, and held himself aloof from her side for almost the entire
evening.
Miss Martha Pinkerton noticed him sitting alone and abstracted on a
sofa, and her kind soul was moved with pity for his companionless
situation, so she resolved to cheer his solitude as well as she was
able. Approaching, she assumed a seat on the opposite side of the sofa.
She looked at him, hemmed, and coughed, but he did not seem to heed her
proximity. At length she resolved to speak.
"Col. Malcome," she said, in her softest tone, "do you know you have
never called to take away the shirts you left for me to make more than
two years ago? I have often thought I would take them to you; but sister
Stanhope said I had better wait, as you would call when you wanted them.
I starched and ironed them all up nice for you; but I am sure the
stiffening is all out, and they are as yellow as saffron by this time."
"Ay, Miss Pinkerton, you were very kind," answered he, bowing politely.
"I had forgot my call on your services entirely. I recollect now that I
contemplated a journey at that time, which circumstances prevented me
from undertaking, and that occasioned my forgetfulness of the package
probably. I will call soon and relieve you of it."
"O, 'tis no burden," she answered; "I only thought I would speak to you
about it to let you know 'twas ready any time you might choose to call.
Don't you think the bride looks very beautiful?" she added, turning the
discourse to more elegant subjects now she had gained his ear.
"Ay, quite interesting and pretty," answered he, turning his attention
for a moment toward the young couple who formed the centre of a mirthful
group.
"Mrs. Edson seems to feel wonderful smart to-night," pursued Miss
Martha; "pleased with her success in match-making, I suppose."
"Ah!" said the colonel, "does Mrs. Edson make matches? I wish she would
form one for me."
The modest maiden blushed scarlet at these words, and remained silent. A
group was just passing, and the colonel effected his escape from his
fair companion and joined them. Several voices called for him at the
piano, and, seating himself before the instrument, he commenced a
brilliant performance. In a few moments he became conscious of the form
of Louise standing in the embrasure of a window near by, her whole soul
apparently absorbed in the music. When he arose she had disappeared. He
sauntered slowly to the hall door, and stepped forth upon the piazza. As
he paced slowly down its marble length he came suddenly upon her,
leaning languidly against a vine-covered column.
"Why do you fly your guests?" asked he; "they will soon grow dim without
your presence."
"Because I am weary and dispirited," answered Louise, "and want quiet
and fresh air."
"Dispirited!" exclaimed he; "I have never seen you so startlingly
brilliant as to-night."
She shook her bright head mournfully. The hilarious voices from the
merry groups within came full upon their ears.
"Walk with me a few moments in the cool quiet of the garden," said he;
"here the air comes heavy and tainted from the crowded apartments
within."
She placed her arm passively in his, and they passed down the steps and
entered the shady paths.
"I marvel to find you so moody and glum," he remarked, after they had
proceeded some distance in perfect silence, "when you have been so
unusually gay through the evening."
She made no answer.
"Let us return to the house," said he at length.
"What for?" she asked, turning her clear eyes quickly on his face.
"Because you do not enjoy your company," he answered.
"No, that is not the reason," said she; "'tis because you are weary of
my presence."
"Weary of your presence!" repeated he. "Louise, you don't believe your
own words. May I stay here at your side till I wish to go away?"
"Certainly," answered she.
"Then let me put my arm around you," said he, encircling her waist, "and
lay your dear head here, and you are mine henceforth, for I shall never
leave you."
For a moment her tearful face was hidden on his bosom.
A low wailing wind swept through the shrubbery that surrounded them, and
one single word, thrilling and awful, as if it fell from the lips of an
accusing spirit, smote on their ears--'_Beware_!'
Louise started from the arm that encircled her and fled toward the
lighted mansion. The party were still occupied in the merry dance, and
no one seemed to have marked her brief absence.
------"Ye mountains,
So varied and so terrible in beauty;
Here in your rugged majesty of rocks
And toppling trees that twine their roots with stone
In perpendicular places, where the foot
Of man would tremble could he reach them--yes,
Ye look eternal!"
Cloud-capped, sky-crowned, mist-mantled, storm-defying Mount Washington!
O, there have been days, and weeks, and months and years, when life's
legion woes pressed heavily upon our souls and bowed our spirits in the
dust; when we dared not glance toward the past, or contemplate the
present, and turned with shuddering dread from the future of starless,
impenetrable gloom; and in those doleful years, through long, long
nights of sleepless pain and agony we have prayed, entreated, implored
grim death to come and ease us of the thorny pangs that tore our
bleeding hearts like venomed arrows. But now on reverent knee we thank
the God of nature, that he has let us live to stand upon thy
sky-piercing summit and look down on the world below! Wild Switzerland
of America! thrice proud are we to call thy granite mountains ours, for
beneath thy snow-capped summits our young existence dawned, and thy
shrill winds and stormy blasts rolled forth the sleeping anthems that
lulled our infant slumbers.
To this wild mountain region came Florence Howard, after luxuriating on
the picturesque Hudson, and dreaming herself in elysian realms among the
"thousand isles" of the queenly St. Lawrence. She was all life and
animation. The excitement of travel and vivid enjoyment of the beautiful
and sublime had banished every trace of the dejection and gloom which
had for many months obscured her brilliancy. Major Howard was delighted
with the improvement in his daughter's appearance, and seemed almost as
young and buoyant as she. Young Williams and his sister were their
constant companions in travel, and Florence found in Ellen a gentle
nature and affectionate heart.
A storm set in on the night of our party's arrival at the Crawford
House, and heavy clouds settled down over the brows of the great
mountains that hemmed in the narrow valley. The hotel was thronged with
visitors, and the new comers had to accept of such accommodations as two
small rooms in the upper story could afford.
"I declare," exclaimed Ellen, when the porters had brought in the
trunks, thrown back the fastenings, and retired, "after rackings, and
tossings, and tumblings enough to disjoint and unhinge a leviathan, to
what a comfortless haven are we arrived at last! O, for a tithe of the
luxury I rolled in at Niagara and Saratoga, or even one of the
state-rooms of the 'Hendrick Hudson' or 'Belle of the Waters!' They were
rooms of state indeed compared with these dismal little pens. How are we
going to turn round in them, Florence, much less unload our trunks of
their wardrobes and array ourselves for appearance in the parlors and
dining saloon?"
"Dear me!" answered Florence, as she stood before the window, blowing
her benumbed fingers, "I don't think we shall have any occasion to open
our trunks, for there is not a frock in mine I could venture to put on,
unless I was willing to be frozen to death within the hour."
"But what are we to do?" said Ellen, approaching the other window and
gazing forth on the dark, stormy evening, that was rapidly closing in
around them. Nothing could be seen beyond the small circle of the valley
in which the house stood, save dense clouds of fog and mist. The rain
poured like a second deluge, and terrific winds roared, and shrieked,
and bellowed like infuriate spirits of the rushing storm.
"What geese we have made of ourselves, Florence!" resumed Ellen, after
she had gazed in silence a few moments on the gloomy prospect presented
to her eyes; "jamming into crowded, uncomfortable coaches, and bruising
and battering our flesh and bones to jelly, all to reach this wonderful
abode of grandeur and sublimity. What 'Alps on Alps' we expected would
tower before our astonished visions! But here we are, sunk in a dismal
abyss on the extreme northern verge of civilization, and never a
mountain to be seen, or anything else save great lowering clouds that
threaten to fall and crush us yet deeper into the earth."
"If I could only get to see the mountains, I would not mind all the
discomfitures," said Florence, peering into the growing blackness
without.
"I tell you there are no mountains," said Ellen, growing impatient in
her disappointment.
"O, yes," returned Florence; "I think there must be a few somewhere in
the vicinity."
"Then why can't we see them?" demanded Ellen.
"They are hidden by the clouds, I suppose," said Florence. "I am told
Mount Washington is veiled in their fleecy mantles for weeks sometimes."
"No doubt it will be thus obscured during our visit," said Ellen, quite
petulantly.
A knock on the door here called their attention. Florence opened it, and
beheld her father, "Well, girls," said he, rubbing his hands, "what do
you think of the White Mountains?"
"When we have seen them we shall be better prepared to give an opinion,"
said Florence.
"For my part, I don't believe in them at all," said Ellen quickly.
Major Howard laughed heartily at this pertly announced conviction of the
non-existence of the wonderful summits they had come to behold, and said
he trusted, "when the storm was over, the elephants would show their
terrible heads."
"But are not you half frozen?" asked he, his teeth chattering as he
spoke; "pray come down in the parlors; you will find them warm and
filled with guests."
"We cannot go in our travelling garbs," said Ellen, "and there's no
opportunity here, as you see, to open our trunks."
"Never mind your dark dresses," returned he; "you will not find the
gossamer fabrics that deck the belles of Saratoga in fashion here. The
fair creatures, however much in defiance of their wishes, are obliged to
conceal their white arms and shoulders in thick warm coverings."
"We would be very glad to do so," said Florence; "but unfortunately our
wardrobes were prepared for a temperate, instead of a frigid zone."
"Well, you will do very well as you are to-night; there are a score of
ladies just arrived, all round the parlor fires, in their travel-stained
garbs; so come on," said he, "and don't be bashful. You will hear the
conversation of those who have passed half the summer in this region,
and perhaps Ellen may come to believe in old Mount Washington."
"I shall never believe in it till I have seen it with my own eyes,"
returned the fair girl, as she and Florence, under the escort of Major
Howard, descended the flights of stairs to the parlor.
As they entered, a hum of voices struck their ears from every side.
There was a group of ladies and gentlemen round the fire, and several of
them vacated their seats for the convenience of the new comers. A large
woman with a very red face remained in one corner and a young girl sat
by her side.
"Have you just arrived?" asked the former of Florence; who was nearest
her.
"Yes, madam," returned Florence, respectfully.
"Well, it is a dismal time for strangers to make their advent, though
the largest arrivals most always occur on such nights as this," said the
fleshy woman, who had rather a pleasant manner, and would have been very
good-looking, Florence thought, but for the rough redness of her
complexion.
"Are such storms frequent here?" inquired Ellen, in a dubious tone.
"Not very," answered the portly lady. "I have been here six weeks, and
have not witnessed so severe a one hitherto. I think myself rather
unfortunate to have been exposed to its severity all day."
Ellen and Florence looked surprised, and the lady continued: "Myself and
daughter joined a large party that ascended the mountains yesterday. We
had a tedious time. I lost my veil, and my face was frozen by exposure
to the biting blasts. The storm came on so furiously we were obliged to
send our horses back by the guides and remain all night."
"What!" exclaimed Ellen, "remain all night on the top of a mountain
exposed to a storm like this! Why did you not all perish?"
"O, we had shelter, and a good one!" returned the lady.
"Where was it? In caves of rocks, or on cold, wet turfs beneath reeking
branches of lofty pines?" asked Ellen.
"Not in caves," answered the lady, "and certainly not on grassy turfs,
or beneath trees of any variety; for old Mount Washington's bleak summit
cannot boast the one or the other."
"What can it boast, then?" inquired Ellen; "wolves and catamounts, that,
together with its shrieking winds, make night hideous?"
"Not wolves, or animals of any species," returned the lady, shaking her
head; "but of huge masses of granite boulders, gray and moss-grown,
heaped in gigantic piles, that eternally defy the blasts and storms of
the fiercest boreal winters."
"O, what a grand thing it must be to stand on its summit!" exclaimed
Florence, with glistening eyes.
"It is, indeed," said the lady, "though I have been pelted by the
merciless storm all day, which added fresh difficulties to the descent,
and still suffer much from my poor, frozen cheeks, I do not for a moment
regret my journey. I suppose you young ladies intend to ascend?"
"I do," said Ellen. "If there is anything here worth seeing, I wish to
see it, after all the fatigue and trouble of getting here."
"O, well," returned the lady, "I assure you there is enough to see. I
have been here, as I have already informed you, six weeks, and some new
wonder bursts upon me every day. You are a little disappointed from
having been so unfortunate as to arrive on this gloomy evening, when
even the nearest views are obscured by clouds. But the guides predict a
splendid day to-morrow. I am sure you will be delighted in the morning
when you rise and behold the great clouds rolling away their heavy
masses and revealing the broad, dark summits of the mountains that hem
in this grassy valley. I shall watch to see you dance into the breakfast
hall in buoyant spirits."
With a pleasant good-evening the lady retired. Florence and Ellen soon
followed. In the upper space they met Major Howard and young Williams,
who were hastening to join them in the parlor.
"Well, sis," said Edward, "Major Howard tells me you vote the White
Mountains all humbug."
"I think Ellen is growing less sceptical," said Florence, "since she has
conversed with a lady who has just descended from their summits."
"O, yes, Nell, there's a Mount Washington, sure as fate," returned
Edward, "and we must ascend its craggy steeps to-morrow; so retire, and
get a refreshing rest to be ready for the fatiguing excursion in the
morning."
"Come over the mountains to me, love,
Over to me--over to me;
My spirit is pining for thee, love,
Pining for thee--pining for thee!"
The sun rose bright above the mountains of the Crawford Notch on the
following morning, and illuminated with his brilliant rays all the green
valley below. Each member of the large party that proposed to ascend
Mount Washington was at an early hour mounted on a strong-built pony,
and led by a guide into the bridle-path which commenced in the woods at
the base of Mount Clinton. Our little band of travellers were foremost
in the file, Florence and Ellen in the greatest glee of laughter and
spirits.
The whole ascent of Clinton was through a dense forest, over a rough,
uneven path, constructed of small, round timbers, called "corduroys."
They were in a rotted, dilapidated condition, and unpleasant as well as
dangerous to ride over.
Emerging from the woods that covered Clinton, the surrounding mountains
began to appear; and from the grassy plain on the summit of Mount
Pleasant, a view was obtained which called forth rapturous shouts from
the whole company.
The descent of Pleasant was tedious. All the ladies were obliged to
dismount, as the path was very rough, and often almost perpendicular
over precipitous rocks, while the frightful chasm that yawned far below
caused many of the adventurers to grow giddy and pale with fear.
Ellen, who was rather timid, began to wish she had remained in the
valley, and continued to disbelieve in mountains; but Florence was all
exhilaration and eagerness to push onward.
Mount Franklin towered next before them. As Florence, who was among the
foremost, reached its summit, she turned on her pony, and gazed down on
the little cavalcade, winding along up the narrow, precipitous path in
single file, with the guides hurrying from one bridle to another, as a
more difficult and dangerous place occurred in the rough way. And she
thought of Napoleon leading an army over the mighty Alps, and how
dauntless and sublime must be the soul of a man who could successfully
accomplish an enterprise so fraught with perilous hazard and
disheartening fatigue.
As the little company wound their way over the unsheltered brow of Mount
Franklin, tremendous blasts swept down from the summits above, and
threatened to unseat them in their saddles, or hurl the whole party over
the fearful gulfs that yawned on every side. The guides collected the
band together and informed them half their journey was completed. Many a
face grew blank with dismay at this announcement. The weather wore a
less promising aspect than when they set out, and the winds pierced them
through and through. Several proposed to turn back. The guides said
there was about an even chance for the clouds to blow over or gather
into a storm, and the party could settle the point among themselves
whether they would turn back or go on.
A gentleman, with features so muffled she could not discover them, rode
to the side of Florence, and said, in a voice she could barely
distinguish among the clamorous winds that howled over the mountain, "Do
you favor the project of returning tamely to the valley and leaving
Mount Washington a wonder unrevealed?"
"No!" answered she, from beneath her thick veil; the muscles of her face
so stiffened with cold she could hardly move her lips.
"Then ride your pony to the centre of these dissenting groups and
propose to move on," said he. "There are none in the party so
craven-souled as to shrink from what a lady dares encounter."
Florence paused a moment, and then guided her pony into the midst of the
company.
"Do you wish to join those who are going back, Miss?" said a guide,
taking hold of her bridle-rein.
"No!" said she in a tone of decision. "I'll lead the way for those who
choose to follow to the summit of Mount Washington."
"Bravo!"--"hurrah!"--"let us on!"--burst from all sides. Three solitary
ones, among them Ellen Williams, turned back, and the others formed into
file and moved onward. Down Mount Franklin and over the narrow path cut
in the cragged side of Monroe, where a single misstep would hurl the
horse and rider down a fathomless abyss, into whose depths the eye dares
hardly for a moment gaze. Then appeared a crystal lakelet, and a little
plain covered with a seedy-looking grass, where the horses rested and
refreshed themselves ere the last desperate trial of their strength and
endurance; for the weary band of adventurers had reached at last the
base of the mighty Washington, whose summit was veiled in heavy clouds.
As they loitered in the plain, the muffled gentleman again approached
Florence, and inquired if she was unattended.
"No, sir," said she. "My father is among the party, also a friend; but
they are not yet come up."
He lingered a moment, and then asked if she would like to dismount.
As the voice met her ear more distinctly, it struck her it had a
familiar sound, and a sudden thought flashed across her mind. She
thanked him for his politeness, but said she was too cold to move.
Her father and young Williams now appeared. "How do you brave it,
Florence?" said Major Howard, drawing in his breath with a shudder.
"Very well, father," answered she.
When the muffled gentleman heard the name Florence pronounced, he
started suddenly and darted a swift glance on the speaker. Then turning
away, he remounted his steed and rode into the front ranks of the line
that was forming. Soon the band commenced their toilsome ascent. The
path wound over perpendicularly-piled masses of gigantic granite
boulders. Often it seemed the poor tired animals, with their utmost
efforts, would never be able to surmount the prodigious rocks that
obstructed their way. Cold, blustering clouds of mists drove in the
faces of the forlorn little party as they labored up and up the
precipitous steeps, till it seemed to many a despairing heart that the
summit of that tremendous mountain would never, never be gained. So
densely hung the threatening clouds around them, they could not tell
their distance from the wished-for goal. At length the guides halloed to
the foremost rider to halt; and directly Florence felt herself in the
arms of a strong man, who sprang over the craggy rocks with surprising
agility, and soon placed her on the door-stone of a small habitation,
which was not only "founded on a rock," but surrounded on all sides by
huge piles of gray granite boulders.
In a few moments the whole dripping, half-frozen party were landed
safely at the "Summit House," on the brow of Mount Washington. Great was
their joy to find a comfortable shelter where they might rest and warm
their chilled limbs; but great also was their dismay to find a storm
upon them, and nothing visible from the miraculous height they had
toiled to gain, but the wet rocks lying close beneath the small windows.
"But these recede. Above me are the Alps,
The palaces of Nature, whose vast walls
Have pinnacled in clouds their snowy scalps,
And throned Eternity in icy halls
Of cold sublimity, where forms and falls
The avalanche, the thunderbolt of snow!
All that expands the spirit, yet appals,
Gather around these summits, as to show
How earth may pierce to heaven, yet leave vain man below."
A calm, beautiful morning succeeded a night of terrors. O, is there in
all the world a grander sight than sunrise on Mount Washington?
The first faint rays breaking gradually through clouds of mist, and
dimly revealing the outlines of surrounding peaks; then long, bright
streams, piercing the gloomy depths of the valleys, chasing gigantic
shadows, like spirits of light contending with the legions of darkness;
and, at length, the whole immense sea of mountains brought into majestic
view, with their unnumbered abysmal valleys covered with forests of
every intermingled variety and shade of green.
Florence Howard separated herself from the remaining portion of the
party, and stood alone on the topmost summit, leaning on the moss-grown
side of a granite boulder, gazing in rapt awe and wonder on the awful
sublimity that opened rapidly to her view. Thin, fringy clouds of mist,
white and silvery in the growing light, were flying over the dark sides
of the mountains, resting a moment in the valleys, and then
disappearing, as a dusky form approached the spot where Florence stood.
"We meet again, Miss Howard;" said a voice at her side, low, and deep
with emotion.
"And above the clouds, Edgar;" answered she, turning toward him, her
face radiant as an angel's in the intensity of the emotions which
overawed her soul. "Could we have met so well in any other place as
here, with earth and its turmoils all below, and only the free blue dome
of heaven above our head?"
"Are you glad to have met me here?" asked he, gazing sadly on her
expressive features.
"Can you ask?" said she. "And this is the only spot where I could have
rejoiced to meet you now, for here you will be Edgar to me, and may I
not be Florence to you?" she added, lifting her clear, liquid eyes with
beseeching earnestness to his face.
He could not withstand this gentle appeal, this touching expression.
Softly his arm stole round her slender waist. She placed her little hand
lightly on his shoulder, and laid her head with confiding tenderness on
his bosom.
O, what was Mount Washington in his glory then? What the whole boundless
prospect that spread its sublime immensity before them? Their eyes
looked only in each other's hearts, and they were warm--O, how warm with
love, and hope, and happiness! Mount Washington was cold. They felt a
pity for its great, insensate piles of granite, that loomed up there to
heaven, cold, bare and stony, void of power to feel and sympathize with
human emotions. Wandering to a sheltered nook among the rocks they sat
down together.
An hour passed by, during which each member of the little party was
intently occupied with his own delighted observations, and then Major
Howard recollected the absence of his daughter, who had left his side,
saying she wished to contemplate the sublime spectacle apart from the
rest of the company. Gazing over the cragged summit, he beheld her
approaching with a gentleman at her side.
"Ay, my little truant," said he, advancing to meet her. "So you tired of
your solitary contemplation, after all."
"I found this fair lady roaming among the rocks, and ventured to escort
her to the party," said the gentleman, bowing politely, as he delivered
Florence to the care of her father.
"Thank you, thank you, sir," returned Major Howard, casting a
scrutinizing glance toward the young man as he turned away.
"My daughter, what do you think of this scene?" he asked, turning to
her.
The glowing happiness, which lighted her features with almost
supernatural beauty, astonished him.
"That I have never seen aught so awfully grand and majestic before,"
returned she, in a tone of wild enthusiasm.
"Does it surpass Niagara?"
"Infinitely," answered she. "Niagara is grand, but it is a single,
solitary grandeur. Here, our vision encompasses a boundless expanse of
dread, terrific sublimities; a sea of towering Alpine summits on every
hand, with fearfully-yawning gulfs and chasms; tremendous precipices,
over whose dizzy edges, as we look down, and down, and down into the
abysmal depths of bright green valleys, starred over with tiny white
cottages, and graced with winding rivers and waving fields of grain, we
mark the dark straight lines of unnumbered railways, with their flying
trains of cars; countless sheets of water flashing like molten silver;
the spires and domes of numerous hamlets, villages, and cities; and, far
in the distance, the broad Atlantic's dark blue surface, jotted over
with white gleaming sails. O, father, father!" she exclaimed, almost
wild with her emotions of awe and admiration, "is there in all the world
a spectacle to equal that which feasts our vision now?"
"It is a grand scene," said the father, participating in his daughter's
vivid enjoyment. "Look far on those blue summits that bound the prospect
to the west and north. Those singularly-formed peaks you notice are
called Camel's Rump and Mansfield mountains."
"Would I might forever dwell here!" exclaimed Florence, her eyes roaming
in every direction, as though her soul could never drink its fill of the
sublimity around.
Perhaps other delights than the scenery would afford rose in bright
anticipation, and caused her to utter this strange, wild wish.
"You forget the awful winters, Florence, when you would perish beneath
the sky-piled snows," said her father.
"O, I would not mind them!" she answered. "I'd have a little habitation,
hidden down among the rocks, where I could sit by a cosey fire and
listen to the billowy blasts that swept over my home in the clouds."
"Alone, Florence?" asked her father. "Would you dwell alone in a place
so wild with terrors?"
"O, no!" said she quickly. "I would have one companion."
"And who should that be?"
"The one I loved best on earth," replied she, turning her clear eyes on
her father's face.
"And that is"----he paused, and added, interrogatively, "Rufus Malcome?"
Florence started. Her features suddenly lost their glowing light, and
darkened into a contemptuous frown.
"Don't breathe that name here!" she exclaimed, almost fiercely. "It is
not worthy to be spoken in the air of God's own taintless purity."
Her father gazed with astonishment and pity. He had fancied the
repugnance and dislike she formerly evinced toward her affianced husband
was dissipated or forgotten in the multiplied excitements and varieties
of travel; and great was his regret and sorrow to find it still rankling
in her bosom. Both stood silent several moments, engaged in their own
thoughts and emotions. At length several voices exclaimed gleefully,
"The ponies, the ponies are coming!"
Major Howard glanced downwards, and beheld the long line of riderless
horses, attended by the guides, slowly wending their way around the
shelving, precipitous side of Mount Monroe. The company collected
together and agreed to set out and meet them; so, returning to the hotel
among the rocks, they partook of a finely-prepared lunch, and, wrapping
warmly in shawls and blankets went forth on their hard, laborious way,
down the steep path of cragged rocks. Sometimes their feet lighted on a
sharp projection, or by a misstep they fell among the stony piles,
bruising and wrenching their flesh and bones. But, notwithstanding all
the fatigues and hardships of the way, the party were in jubilant
spirits. As the prospect narrowed with the descent, they were all taking
a last look at the disappearing wonders, and shouting their earnest
farewells.
At the "Lake of the Clouds" they halted and drank of its cold, crystal
waters. The ponies were feeding on the plain, and the party gladly
mounted and commenced their long, toilsome descent.
As the shades of evening were falling, their safe arrival in the valley
was hailed by assembled groups on the piazzas of the Crawford House.
"Love thee! words have no meaning to my deep love;
It hath purged me from the weakness of my sex,
And made me new create in thee. Love thee!
I had not lived until I knew thee."
On arriving at the hotel, Florence retired to her room, which she found
vacant, and learned Ellen had joined a party on an excursion to Mount
Willard, one of the loftiest peaks of the Crawford Notch, to whose
summit there is a carriage road.
She drew forth her journal, and, sitting down beside the window,
commenced to write.
Nimbly the golden pen sped over the spotless page, leaving a train of
sprightly thoughts behind it, while the bright face glowed and sparkled
with the buoyant happiness of the soul within.
"I feel like one just dropped from the clouds," she wrote, "and I should
be inconsolable at my sudden descent from the august abode of eternal
sublimities to the grovelling haunts of care and discontent, but that a
sun-soaring spirit companioned and illumined my fall.
"I have stood above the clouds that swept the brows of lofty surrounding
mountains, and seen _that star of mine_ rise sweet and clear upon my
earnest vision, and felt my long-chilled heart grow warm and glad
beneath its beaming rays of light and love. I toiled up the miraculous
steeps of hoary-headed, granite-crowned Mount Washington, to realize a
double joy. The stern, gloomy grandeur was alone sufficient to awaken my
profoundest awe, my strongest admiration; but a warm heart-happiness
stole over me, which spread a mantling glory over all the thousand
dark-browed mountains that loomed in their awful majesty on every side.
"And ever, till my heart has ceased to beat, though I should roam in
foreign lands, along the castled Rhine, or beneath the sunny skies of
classic Italy, Mount Washington will be to me the glory of the earth!
For, standing on its granite piles, while sunrise pierced the gloomy
valleys far below, a love nestled warmly to my bosom, with which I would
not part for India's wealth of gems. How rich am I in the knowledge of
Edgar's love! My soul is strong and firm as the mountains where my joy
was born. Shall I ever tremble or waver again? Am I not mailed in armor
to meet unshocked the battling swords and lances of life's armied
legions of cares and sorrows? With Edgar's love to nerve my soul, what
is there that I cannot endure? Surely, I could survive all things save
separation from him; and is not this the one which will be demanded of
my strength?
"But I will not mar my happiness by dark forebodings of the future. Let
me enjoy the sunshine while it lasts. What shall I say to my
father?--what will he say to me when he learns who was the companion of
my lonely mountain stroll, and the rider at my bridle-rein during all
the long, dangerous descent? I fear he will be angry and hurry me away
immediately; and yet, with his discrimination, I think he must discern
the vast superiority of Edgar Lindenwood to that low-bred, mean-souled
Malcome.
"But it is time this record should end, for twilight approaches, and the
shadows of the great mountains darken over the valley."
She closed her journal just as Ellen Williams, returned from her
excursion, burst into the room. She flung her arms around Florence, and
covered her with frantic kisses.
"O, I am so glad to have you safely back!" she exclaimed; "I feared I
should never behold you again. How did you live through a night like
last on that dreadful mountain-top?"
"We had a comfortable shelter," said Florence, returning her friend's
warm embraces.
"Did you wish you were down here in the valley, when the awful storm
overtook you?"
"No, indeed," answered Florence; "my courage rose above all
difficulties. O, Ellen! you know not what you lost, when, chilled by the
blasts that swept Mount Franklin, you grew discouraged and turned back."
"So Ned tells me," said Ellen; "but I saw sublimity enough from Mount
Willard to fill my little soul with rapture, though I had no
artist-companion at my side to point out the grandest views to my
untaught vision."
Here she fixed an arch glance on Florence, who blushed slightly as she
said:
"I do not understand your quizzical looks."
"Probably not," returned Ellen, in a pleasant, bantering tone; "and if I
should tell you Mr. Lindenwood, the young artist of whom I spoke to you
at Niagara, had made his appearance in these regions, no doubt you would
express appropriate surprise at the information. However, your father
has been impressed with his appearance, and sought an introduction. I
saw them in the parlor but a moment since, engaged in conversation."
"Is it possible?" said Florence, her eyes lighting with pleasure.
"Why, very possible," returned Ellen, "and they seemed mutually pleased
with each other. Come, let us make ready and go down. I promised Ned to
return in five minutes."
The young ladies descended to the parlor, where Florence beheld her
father standing before a table, with Edgar at his side, examining a
volume of engravings.
She approached softly, when Major Howard turned, and introduced his
companion as "Mr. Lindenwood, a former acquaintance of hers, who was
visiting the mountains for the purpose of sketching views, and obtaining
geological specimens."
Florence saw at once, by her father's words and manner, that he did not
suspect Edgar's identity with the muffled figure which had been her
companion on the mountains; and, bowing politely, expressed her
"pleasure at again meeting Mr. Lindenwood."
Ellen and her brother joined them, and the evening passed in pleasant
rehearsals of the wonders and adventures of their late expedition to the
"realms of upper air."
As Major Howard led his daughter to the door of her apartment, he
remarked: "That young Lindenwood is a fine fellow. I declare, I never
thought that wild hermit's boy would grow into a refined, polished
gentleman. You hardly recognized him, did you, Florence?"
"He is very much changed in his appearance," said she, briefly.
"Certainly he is," returned her father; "one seldom meets a handsomer
fellow. He tells me there is a great deal of fine scenery through a
place called the Franconia Notch. He is going there in a few days to
complete some sketches. I think we will join him: now we are here, we
may as well see all there is to be seen;--unless you wish to go home,"
he added, finding his daughter silent in regard to the proposed
excursion.
"I wish to go home?" exclaimed she, suddenly; "if you remain here till
that time comes, your head will be white as the snows of these northern
winters."
Laughing at her enthusiasm for mountains, he kissed her cheek and
retired.
"Most wondrous vision! The broad earth hath not,
Through all her bounds, an object like to thee,
That travellers e'er recorded. Nor a spot
More fit to stir the poet's phantasy;
Grey Old Man of the Mountain, awfully
There, from thy wreath of clouds thou dost uprear
Those features grand,--the same eternally!
Lone dweller 'mid the hills! with gaze austere
Thou lookest down, methinks, on all below thee here."
At the Flume House, three weeks later, we find our little party of
travellers, all in apparently fine spirits and delighted enjoyment of
the wild, enchanting scenery of the Franconia Notch.
"Well, Lindenwood, what do you intend to show us next?" asked Major
Howard, as the group disposed themselves on the sofas of their own
private parlor for an evening of rest and quiet, after a day passed in
visits to different objects in the vicinity. "I declare these mountains
will exhaust me entirely, and I shall be obliged to go away without
beholding one half of their alleged wonders."
Young Williams laughed and said, "You are not half as good a traveller
as your daughter, major. Instead of looking worn and fatigued by her
repeated rambles, she seems more fresh and blooming than on our first
arrival."
"Yes," returned the father, looking affectionately on his daughter, "she
thrives wonderfully on mountains. I recollect, when we stood on the
freezing summit of Washington, she expressed a wish to burrow among its
rocks and pass a life-time there, listening to the winds o' nights, and
other like charming diversions."
"I did not think her disposition so solitary," remarked young Williams.
"O, she was not going to dwell alone! She wanted one companion to share
her habitation. I don't know who it was,--perhaps you were the doomed
one!"
"I dare not presume to think Miss Florence would select me for a doom so
blissful," returned he, gallantly. "Her choice would fall on some of my
more fortunate neighbors."
"Rather say _un_fortunate," said Florence, coloring; "for in that light
I think most people would regard the prospect of a life passed amid the
clouds and storms of Mount Washington."
"Would you thus regard it, Lindenwood?" inquired young Williams, turning
his gaze upon Edgar.
"I don't know," returned the latter. "It might prove an agreeable
summer-home; but I think I would want to fly away on the approach of
winter."
Major Howard drew forth his guide-book and occupied himself turning over
the pages a few moments.
"We have achieved the Flume, the Pool, and the Basin to-day," said he at
length. "Say, Lindenwood, where shall we go to-morrow? You are the
pioneer of the band."
"I have thought, should the day prove fine," answered he, "it would be
pleasant to make an excursion to the summit of Mount Lafayette, or the
'Great Haystack' mountain, as it is sometimes called, which lies several
miles west from this point."
"More mountains towering before us! When shall we have done with them?"
said the major, in a lugubrious tone. "How high is this Haystack you
speak of?"
"But seven hundred feet less than Mount Washington," answered Edgar.
"O dear!" groaned the major. "Heaven save me from attempting the
ascension! Can we do nothing better than tear our clothes and bruise our
shins among brushwood and bridle-paths; clambering up to the sky just to
stare about us a few moments, and then tumbling down headlong, as it
were, to the valleys again?"
"Well," said Edgar, "if the Great Haystack intimidates you, suppose we
ride up through the Notch, and visit the 'Old Man.'"
"What old man?" asked the major.
"The Old Man of the Mountain!"
"I should have no objection to calling on the old fellow," returned
Major Howard, "if he did not live on a mountain; but I cannot think of
climbing up any more of these prodigious steeps,--even to see a king in
his regal palace."
A burst of laughter followed the major's misapprehension of the object
which Lindenwood had proposed to visit.
"It is not a man of flesh and blood we are to see, father," said
Florence, as soon as she could command her voice sufficiently to speak,
"but a granite profile, standing out from a peak of solid rock, exactly
resembling the features of a man's face; whence its name, 'Old Man of
the Mountain.'"