Google Books (Harvard University)
Transcriber's Notes:
(Harvard University)
_By the same Author, 6s. each_.
The Hosts of the Lord
Voices in the Night
On the Face of the Waters
The Potter's Thumb
In the Permanent Way
Red Rowans
The Flower of Forgiveness
Miss Stuart's Legacy
London: William Heinemann
From the Five Rivers
By
Flora Annie Steel
London
William Heinemann
Gunesh Chund.
The Blue Monkey.
Shah Sujah's Mouse.
Suttu.
At a Girls' School.
In a Citron Garden.
Nur Jehan.
Shurfu the Zaildar.
Songs of the People:
Plough Song.
Sowing Song.
Harvest Song.
Cotton-picking Song.
Outside the village a man stood alone in the moonless night. Yet it
was not dark; for in the unending depths of violet blue the stars hung
many-hued and many-sized--each in their order, so clear, so bright,
that the simile "as one star differeth from another in glory" stood
out in all its vivid truth, undimmed by the mists of a Western
atmosphere.
The man, however, neither looked nor thought of the stars. He had seen
them shine thus after the winter rains ever since he had been able to
see, and his eyes were full of the shadowy stretch of level fields
which seemed to rise towards the pale horizon. There was a fresh, damp
smell in the air, and close to his feet some lighter shadows
surrounded by darker ones showed that the recent rains had been heavy
enough to leave fresh pools of water in the hollows whence the village
had been dug--hollows like the skeleton at the feast, serving to
remind the inhabitants that their origin was dust, their end the
grave.
Toil and moil flung their refuse into these as if in derision; the
pitiless eastern rain washed the mud from wall and roof back to its
birthplace; but year after year the antlike builders piled more mud
over the ruins of the old, until the village, girt by its grave, grew
dignified by age, and, gaining renewal from its own mortality, rose
higher and higher above the surrounding plain.
Such a treeless, formless plain, circled round by that fillet of paler
sky where the stars shone dimly, like distant fire-flies. Not a
landmark anywhere, save, behind the man, his own village. By day an
ant-hill of low huts; in the soft darkness piled like a fort,
lightless, soundless. He turned towards it, his eyes seeking a central
block standing higher than the rest. It was his house; the house where
he and his forebears for many a generation had been born; where he had
stood by his father's death-bed and taken the reins of office from the
dying hands; where he, too, hoped to die and pass the headship of the
village to some stalwart son. And it was childless as yet. A curious
thrill seemed to join heart and hand and brain in a trinity of skill
and strength and love, for yonder in that dim house a woman was
bringing a child into the world with pains beyond the primal curse;
and he, the father, driven by a restlessness new to him, had wandered
out into the night to seek patience in action. It could not be over
yet; his mother had said it would be long, and the jackals had not yet
given their second cry. He turned again to the fields.
"The land is good," he murmured to himself, "the crop is good, and the
rain is good. If only this be a son--"
He drew a long breath that was half a sigh. A stir in the thorn
enclosures where the cattle were folded for the night caught his
practised ear, and he walked towards them, listening. A feeble bleat
followed by a patter of feet made him push aside the rude hurdle
barring the entrance. Among the crowding sheep and goats the first
lamb of the season lay beside its mother, and his eyes lit up as he
forced his way through the circle of uncertain elders to reach it. He
was in luck to be there, else the first-fruits would have been dead by
morning. He lifted the lamb gently, thinking the while that he must
divide the flock ere another night, and so run no more risks. As he
made his way back to the village with swinging strides the mother
trotted after him, bleating, and the village dogs snuffed at his heels
silently; they knew better than to bark at Gunesh Chund the head-man,
tall and strong; looking all the taller by reason of his white
turban and the lank folds of white drapery falling from his high
shoulders--so tall, that he had to stoop in order to enter the door
leading to the outer court of his house. Within were lights and a
cackle of women's voices; but here, in the wide expanse of beaten mud
floor, darkness and silence, save for the cud-chewing of the milch
kine ranged in one corner, and the rasping rub of a weighted halter
through its ring, as the head-man's pony turned at its master's
entrance.
Gunesh stood still and called, "Mother! mother!"
An old woman with an oil cresset held above her head came to the inner
doorway and peered into the darkness through the flowers and branches
garlanding the entrance. Then she set aside the swinging sickle hung
to bar all passage to evil spirits, and, stepping out, shook her head
at the mute inquiry in her son's eyes.
"Not yet, O Gunesh. But all goes well. 'Twill come with the dawn, like
many another. And fear not, O my child. 'Tis a son. The stars and the
omens are agreed."
A faint bleat made her set the cresset nearer. "What hast thou there,
O Gunesh?"
"The firstling, mother. 'Twas in the fold. I have brought it hither
for safety."
The old woman's face shone with delight.
"A ewe lamb! 'Tis another omen; and there is luck in the house
to-night; for as the ewe lamb to the fold so is the male child to the
hearth. Have no fear, O Gunesh! Have no fear!"
She laid one wrinkled hand on her son's arm, and, with the lamp held
high in the other, gazed fondly on his face, curiously like her
own--the same refined, aquiline features and narrow forehead; but the
man's was less alert than the woman's, and softer, especially now as
he stood hesitating.
"And--and--Veru?" he asked, somewhat sheepishly.
His mother shrugged her shoulders. "Oh, Veru! She is well enough. She
suffers, but that is the woman's part. 'Twould have been better for
her years ago. But she will forget. All women do, and the omens are
good--"
A querulous complaint from within, followed by women's voices, made
her pause.
"I must return. Folk are so ignorant nowadays, I wonder aught comes
right. But thou needst not fear, my son; the old mother knows it all.
So! the lamps are lit, the flowers strewn, the spices burned, the
chants raised duly. The Great Ones must needs be pleased; and look
you, Guneshwa! the sun comes back with the dawn."
"Yea, mother," he answered, meekly, "and sure the firstling shows
luck."
When she left him he threw some straw in one corner for the ewe, and
guided the tottering lamb towards it, smiling to himself over the
frail, ridiculous attempts at escape made by the little creature. The
bleats subsided into contented silence, and he groped a stumbling way
up the narrow steps leading to the flat, square roof of his house.
There he sat down, his back against the parapet wall which gave
seclusion to the women's court below, whence a glimmer of light and a
murmur of voices reached eyes and ears. The rest was darkness and
silence.
"With the dawn," he muttered--"it will come with the dawn."
He took a nugget of opium from an inner pocket, broke off a bit, and
having swallowed it set himself deliberately towards patience. Most
men of his race would have found the situation simple, and their
minds, if on the rack of expectation, would have been free from doubt.
Gunesh Chund's heart, however, was softer than most men's--softer than
his mother, for instance, deemed a true man's should be. It was
occupied with one thought. Supposing it was a girl, after all? What
should he do? He could not feel orthodox disgust or anger at the idea.
Yet he longed for a son, if only because it would settle so many vexed
questions and make life so much easier. Even now with his mother and
Veru peace was not always to be had; but how would it be if the second
wife with whom the former threatened him came to make a third in the
quarrel? Sooner or later he would have to make a fourth, of course;
that was always the end, and he had all a kindly man's hatred of tears
and fuss.
Yet a son he must have, and that quickly, for, as his mother said,
truly the cousin's young wife was becoming unbearably pretentious over
those big boys of hers. What wonder? Were they not what all boys
should be? Gunesh Chund felt himself mean and spiritless as he
recognized his own admiration for those whom his mother regarded as
mere pretenders to the hereditary office of head-man. Did not Kishnu,
their black-browed, sonsy mother, openly declare that, even if Gunesh
had a son, hers might yet be preferred as being older, should autumn
chills and summer pestilence carry the present incumbent off before
his time? At least so the old mother said. And one thing was certain:
Devi Ditta and Pooram Lal, the village elders, were no friends of his
since that dispute about the common lands. They might side with the
other branch. Without doubt a son must be had to carry on work in this
world and give life to the next.
And if this was a girl? A bleat from the lamb below made him suddenly
smile at the very idea of baby fingers playing with his beard and baby
kisses on his face. Were girls' kisses less sweet, girls' fingers less
soft?
He shifted uneasily, conscious that his thoughts were heresy in his
mother's eyes. Doubtless she was right. He would have to marry again,
since Veru would plainly be accursed, unable, even after all the
pilgrimages and vows, to perform her first duty. As he sat trying to
harden his heart, wild, skirling chants rose every now and again from
the women's court, and at each outburst he shifted again uneasily; for
through the noise he seemed to hear the cry it was meant to deaden,
lest a complaint might anger the Dread Givers of Pain and Pleasure.
And Veru had been good to him. He sat on till the dream-compeller made
even his hazy thought more hazy, and patience came with sleep.
When he awoke the dawn was past, and as he stretched his long length
skyward in the first enjoyment of past sleep, the whole circle of
earth and heaven round him was ablaze with the sun rising gloriously
over the cloudless world. He stood so, for a moment, the centre of his
universe, contented, serene, ere memory returned to him. Then he made
his way down to the yard with fear at his heart. All was still as the
grave, even in the women's court, and it was a relief when he peered
past the swinging sickle to see his mother wrapped in her quilt dozing
by the open fire-place in one corner.
He went over to her and touched her on the arm.
"Mother!" he called.
She was alert in an instant, and looking in his face answered his mute
question fiercely.
"It is a girl--a useless girl! What need to wake thee for such bitter
news? The woman is accursed."
The quick assent rising to his lips was stilled by a little cry from
within the quilt. Something--he knew not what it was--thrilled him and
kept him silent.
"Is--is it pretty, mother?" he asked, sheepishly, after a while.
The old lady eyed him with suspicious scorn.
"See for thyself, ninny," she replied, shortly.
Gunesh Chund felt a distinct disappointment as he looked down at his
first-born. He had forgotten what new-born babies were like since the
days when, as a boy, he was admitted to such sights. This one struck
him as ugly, or at least as less pleasing than a lamb or a calf.
"God send it be not ill-looking, mother!" he blurted out in a tone of
alarm.
She laughed, still in the same short and scornful fashion.
"Lo! there never was a plain woman among us. The child is well enough,
and favours thee. Is it not enough that it should be a girl?"
He did not hear the latter sentence. Accustomed in all things to
accept his mother's fiat, he was lost in trying to trace the likeness
to himself, and, to aid his efforts, drew a reflective forefinger over
the featureless face, feeling, as he did so, that strange thrill at
his heart again. Suddenly, as he neared the mouth, the lips trembled
and a little red tongue shot swiftly on his finger-tip. He burst into
a great roar of delighted laughter.
"Ho! ho! Look, mother, look!"
retorted the old woman, crossly, as she tucked the baby away again. He
felt abashed, but the laughter had left him at peace with all mankind.
---------------------
---------------------
"And Veru? How is she?"
This was too much. The stern old lady rose to her full height and
faced him. Her grey hair, disordered by the night's watching, escaped
from the close folds of her veil, and the quilt slipping from her
showed her tall, erect as a girl. She threw out her right hand in
declamation:
"Thou art no better than a woman thyself, O Gunesh! To ask after Veru,
the wife of disgrace! Thou shouldst not have thought of her. Were it
not better she were dead? Ungrateful! wicked! For she must be wicked
to frustrate my prayers and alms. Lo, have I not fulfilled her every
wish these nine months past? And now 'tis 'How is Veru?' forsooth, and
no thought of the mother who has slaved in vain. But this is an end.
She is accursed, and thou must bring a new wife to the hearth if thou
wouldst not lose thine own soul, and the soul of those who begat thee.
Leave Veru her girl, and be kind to her, if thou art a ninny. There
are other women in the world who can bear sons."
As Gunesh crept out of the house feeling small, despite his great
height, he told himself it was only what he had expected. For all
that, his mother might have waited a day or two ere speaking of the
new wife, within Veru's hearing also. God send she had been asleep
after her long suffering!
He was so dispirited that he did not care to face the _dharmsala_ with
its congregation of elders ready to condole, and its younger men
inclined to sneer. So he gave up his morning pipe, and carried the
firstling to take possession of the lambing fold. As he walked along
in the sunshine, as he had walked in the shadow, with it in his arms,
he felt its little tongue sucking at his hand, and it seemed to hurt
him, body and soul.
The forty days of seclusion being over, Veru, in her finest clothes,
sat cross-legged on a string bed ready to receive company. The
court-yard had been freshly swept, the brass cooking-vessels scoured
and set in a row against the mud wall, where the sun smote them
into retaliating rays. A few flat baskets of sweets, covered with
penny-halfpenny Manchester pocket-handkerchiefs printed in the
semblance of a pack of cards, stood ready for the expected guests, and
Gunesh Chund's mother had been busy all the morning making a sort of
furmenty in honour of the occasion; for, though she considered her
labour thrown away on the birth of a girl, she would not for the world
have omitted a single ceremony, and so have given colour to outside
condolence. Veru herself was a delicate-looking, pretty woman of about
six-and-twenty, with a broad forehead, and a thin-lipped, sensitive
mouth--both of which characteristics were more blemishes than beauties
in the opinion of her neighbours. Her chief defect, however, in the
eyes of the stalwart, open-hearted, shrill-voiced, village women lay
in a certain refined reserve, which they set down to conceit born of
her pretensions to scholarship--though how any woman could be so
wrong-minded as to usurp man's estate by learning to read and write
passed their simple understanding. But Veru, who had lived with a rich
uncle during her girlhood, had shared her cousin's desultory visits to
a mission school for a year or two, and returned to her parents and
marriage with a book in which she could read glibly, and a reputation
for writing. She could also knit many-hued comforters in _brioche_
stitch, and darn strips of net in divers patterns--appalling and
almost incredible culture, viewed with disfavour by all save Gunesh,
who was simple enough to admire it; probably because _she_ was woman
enough to admire him immensely.
The infant, to whom the name of Nihali had been given, lay in her
arms, bedizened into the semblance of a performing monkey; tight
little silk trousers on the bandy legs, a tinsel-decorated muslin
bodice, and a flowing veil, the size of a pocket-handkerchief,
disposed over the round skull-cap where a black fringe of wool
simulated hair. On this outfit Veru had spent much time and trouble,
while her mother-in-law grumbled under her breath at the expense, or
openly said that in her day a decent woman would have thought it shame
to make such a fuss over a girl, after keeping her master waiting ten
long years for a child.
There was bitter war between these two women outwardly: yet, however
fiercely Veru combated the elder woman's views, in her heart of hearts
she could not overcome the inherited conviction that the meanest thing
on God's earth, was a sonless wife. Cultured retorts as to what she
had heard and read in school of Western opinions, and of the sex of
the Queen-Empress, did very well as lethal weapons, but as inward balm
were most unsatisfactory. Often and often, after a passage of arms in
which her more dexterous point had reduced her adversary to the usual
appeal for patience, she would creep away into one of the dark,
windowless rooms opening off the central court-yard, on pretence that
the light prevented her baby from sleeping. There, safe from
observation, she would weep salt tears over its unconscious face.
After all her prayers and alms, why had not Fate given her a son? How
much easier it would have been for everybody, Fate included; for now
high Heaven would have to be wearied once more!
She had seen but little of her husband during her days of seclusion,
so the task of shutting her white teeth over a retort when he
was by had not been a very difficult one. But now the every-day
life was beginning again, and it would be harder to keep up the
forbearance--though she was clever enough to see that it earned his
gratitude.
He came in before going to his afternoon's work in the fields to
inspect the preparations. The sight of the bedizened baby awoke his
broad laugh.
"Ho! ho! ho! Grandmother, see what a figure Veru hath made of the
child! For sure it is like the puppets Dya Ram brought round at Diwali
Fair, that danced on a string!"
"I'm glad thy wits give thee sense to see the folly of dressing the
child so," grumbled the old woman. "In my day there were none of those
fal-lals on farmers' children. We left them to the silly town's-folk."
"In your day, mother, farmers' wives did not know how to make them;
but I cut and sewed them all," retorted Veru, with studious courtesy.
"Aye, aye, that's true," remarked her husband, relieved. "Thou hast
clever fingers despite they are so small.--Hath she not, mother?"
"Clever, mayhap; but in my time wives found better work than snipping
and sewing. They made stalwart sons for the hearth, and left clothes
to the tailor. 'Tis the other way on now, I suppose. Thou wilt send to
the tailor for a son soon, I suppose. It is time."
"Nay, but the mother is right," interrupted Gunesh Chund, hastily,
seeing Veru's eyes begin to flash; "the little one is like a puppet,
as I said, Veru, and 'tis happier with its arms and legs free. I love
to watch it struggling on its back like a young duck with the megrims.
'Tis comical. But feed it well, wife; if 'twere a calf I would hold it
over-thin. Young things need fat. Do as the mother bids thee, and 'tis
sure to thrive. Had she not daughters of her own in her time?" His
voice had a ring of appeal in it.
"Aye, and some of them in man's guise," muttered the old lady as she
watched him bending over the baby. Nevertheless, she spoke more softly
as she bade him get to his fields, the proper place for a man.
"True, mother, true," he assented happily, as he went to the door
with her. "And there is no place I like so well. 'Tis good to stand
knee-deep in young corn when it grows blue-green, as this year. Thou
shouldst see it in the dip by the sandy bottom. And see the dappled
sky like a partridge breast, auguring more rain. A good harvest,
mother! A good harvest and new dresses--"
She checked him. "Nay, Gunesh, there is the new wife to think of
first. Good harvest days are good wedding days."
They were beyond ear-shot, and yet the man gave a quick glance at the
woman within.
"Hush, mother, hush!" he said, almost in a whisper. "Should a man take
the name of another woman in his mouth, with the cry of a month-old
babe in his ear? There is time yet."
"Time!" she echoed. "Time, indeed! 'Tis not time, but will, is
wanting. Get thee gone to thy fields--thank Heaven thou art not a
ninny there--for see, yonder comes Kishnu to the reception, bringing
all her three. The jade! 'Tis only to crow over our girl!"
Gunesh tried to frown as he stood irresolute, but his mild face
refused the task.
"May be, mother," he replied simply, "yet were the boys mine I would
take them wherever I went, crow or no crow. They are so sweet."
His mother stamped her foot. "Aye, aye! Sweet for sure. And will not
the eldest make a fine _lumberdar?_ Folk might almost deem him thy
son."
"I could wish none better."
Foiled by his gentleness, she watched his tall figure go down the
alley for a minute, and then began the attack in a more promising
quarter.
"Here comes Kishnu, Veru. Did I not say she would be the first? The
crowing cock loves early hours. She hath her three with her, and
Gunesh, poor soul, must needs stop and fondle them. He loves those
boys; and who can blame him? Sure, a man's heart cannot live in his
breast always!"
"That is true; but when a man gives it to a wife she can keep it from
straying," retorted Veru. She was never without words, but they were
empty diet, and she could not help looking at Kishnu's boys with
hungry eyes.
"I scarce liked to bring Shivu here to-day," quoth the latter,
settling herself with a flounce among the voluminous skirts that hung
half-way down her trousered legs. "You see, he grows so big--almost
too much of a man for these women's doings."
She tittered, twisted her huge nose-ring to one side, disposed her
youngest at her capacious bosom, and, thus prepared for conversation,
began afresh in a shrill, strident voice:
"So that's your girl, Veru! Sure you have dressed it for the wedding
already! Early days; but with a daughter one has to think betimes.--Is
it not so, grandmother?"
"Our women have no difficulty in finding husbands," replied Veru's
mother-in-law, who, whatever she might say herself, was not inclined
to stand impertinence from outsiders. "But perhaps in thy family 'tis
a different story."
Now Kishnu was no beauty, despite her fruitfulness. Neither was she
ready of tongue. So she sniffed, comforting herself with the knowledge
that words, after all, were but poor weapons against facts. As an
immediate revenge, however, she dragged the most disagreeable topic
she could think of into the conversation.
"Guneshwa looked but ill at ease, it struck me. No doubt the new
settlement in the village gives him trouble."
"What new settlement?" asked Veru, sharply.
Settlement time meant war time, since in the compiling of new records
lay ample opportunity for spite; and her husband as head-man had
enemies.
Kishnu tittered again. This was better than she had expected.
"So! I have broken the seal of a secret. Mayhap Gunesh said nothing
lest it should worry thee during the time of recovery. But 'tis so. My
man heard it awhile ago through his friends at court; for certain,
yesterday. Sure, Veru, 'tis a thousand pities this is a girl. Gunesh
could have written a son's name as his heir in the new papers; and
that would have ended dispute forever."
The _lumberdar's_ women folk looked at each other, for once in accord.
Gunesh had hidden this thing from them, and they were too proud to
show how it had moved them. They preferred letting the shaft rankle,
perhaps needlessly, rather than inquire further of Kishnu.
"'Tis no pity at all," retorted Veru, tossing her head. "There can be
no dispute that I know of. And I prefer girls."
This went too far for her mother-in-law. At the risk of Kishnu's
delectation, she lost patience.
"There 'tis! Heard one ever the like? '_I prefer girls_.' So! thus
thou mockest the great ones, and by idle words turn my prayers to
naught. 'Tis too vexatious--"
"Girls are every whit as good as boys. The great Queen--"
"Pshaw! I am sick of the great Queen! Why did she come to breed
dissension, and teach young women to mock at the old? Though, for
sure, she herself knows better, seeing she hath proved her worth by a
good family of sons."
"So may Nihali in her time."
"What! That sickly thing! Thou wilt scarce rear her to the first year,
and mayhap 'tis better so. 'Dead girls,' thou knowest, 'bring live
boys.'"
Veru's face of fear sent a pang of remorse to a heart which beat true
after its fashion, and the old lady went on, hastily:
"Nay, daughter-in-law! Perchance I am wrong. The child dwindles a bit,
no more. I will make seven spices for it. 'Twill thrive if only thou
wilt be reasonable, and save thyself from tantrums and tears. 'Tis the
calf has the pain, mind you, if the cow steals green wheat."
"And with a girl the mind is at rest," continued Kishnu, in malicious
consolation. "Now, with me, if the charcoal rubs from their foreheads
I'm agog with fear of the evil eye, and the rest of my day is wasted
in prayers and offerings. As thou sayst, Veru, girls are better."
Veru had no answer ready; and even when the stream of visitors set in,
full of chattering congratulations and condolences, she did not find
her tongue. The noise, she said, made her head ache and disturbed the
baby. She stripped the finery from its little limbs, and, wrapping it
warmly in her veil, held it tight to her breast, refusing to uncover
it in order to gratify the curious.
Gunesh, coming in from the darkening fields, with their calm in his
face, found her crying in the inner room.
"She wants to bring another wife home even now. She will not have
patience and wait awhile." That was the burden of her complaint, while
Gunesh sat comforting her uneasily.
"Surely, Veru, I have waited," he said, after a time. "Few would have
been so patient; but thou art a good wife and duteous even with the
mother."
"And thou! Oh, thou art good, Gunesh--so good to me! See, thy patience
hath brought Nihali. Wait a year, only a year longer, husband, and it
will bring thee a son."
He looked at the mother and child with kindling eyes.
"A year! Surely, surely! That is but fair. So dry thine eyes, wife,
for I am hungry."
That night, when Veru had retired to her bed with the baby, and he sat
smoking with his mother in the outer yard, he asked her wistfully if
she really thought the child was dwindling.
She turned on him fiercely, perhaps from a feeling of pity.
"And if it does, canst not trust me to physic it? Or wouldst thou have
a man doctor to thy women's rooms? They tell me the travelling one
Shall I bid him come, since thou seemst to hold by new-fangled ways?"
---------------------
---------------------
Gunesh Chund filled his pipe again with poppy-leaves and tobacco, and
watched his mother carding cotton viciously. What would she say if she
knew of the promise he had made to Veru? The narcotic did not soothe
him; and when sleep failed, he strolled out to where the village
elders sat discussing the possible effects of this new settlement on
the total of revenue due from the community. The familiar company was
a relief, though it brought a doubt of his own wisdom in waiting a
year. Still it was only a year. After that, if Veru failed to bear him
a son, his duty to himself, to his ancestors, and to the _Sirkar_
demanded another wife.
Whether Gunesh Chund's mother, when she prophesied evil to little
Nihali, did so from conviction or temper, it was not long before her
words came true. Despite the marvellous seven spices, and many another
time-honoured remedy, the baby dwindled and pined unaccountably. Then
came a day when Veru, half distraught and absolutely helpless, sat
with it in her arms, sullen and silent. The old women of the village
dropped in one after the other, more from curiosity than sympathy,
each laying down the law as to some infallible nostrum, whose efficacy
they defended against other views in high-pitched cackle. At last
Veru, whose smattering of knowledge only brought incredulity without
lending aid, declaring she would not have the child tormented further,
laid it to her breast, and turned her back upon hoarded wisdom. Only
when Gunesh Chund came wandering in restlessly from the fieldwork,
which for the first time in his life failed to bring him peace, she
unclasped her straining arms to show him the still face lying against
the full breast that roused no sign of life or desire.
A piteous sight. The big tears ran down his cheeks and fell on the
soft, closed hand. He took a corner of his cotton shawl and wiped them
away clumsily but with infinite tenderness.
"Sure, thou dost love her, though she is a girl," said Veru, with the
calm of despair.
The man broke into a sob and turned away.
"Mother, canst thou do nothing?" he asked, in all the wistful
confidence of a child, laying his great hand on the old woman's head
as she bent over her task of kneading the dough for his supper.
"Do! What is to be done with a woman who cries out if the child is
touched? I tell thee, O Guneshwa, the little one is bewitched--though
God only knows why any one should trouble to cast an eye on a girl.
Ask Munlya. Ask Premi, or Chuni, or any wise woman. But Veru heeds us
not, saying the books deny it. So be it! The child will die!"
Gunesh Chund lingered, hesitating.
"I--I--perhaps, mother, 'twould be better to fetch the doctor. He is
here still, they say."
His mother sprang to her feet, all the vigour and fire of her past
youth in eyes and gesture.
"That I should have lived to hear such words in the house where I came
a modest bride, where never man set foot save thy father and mine!
Wilt thou cast thy honour and mine in the dust for a baby girl? Be it
so, Gunesh! Choose now between her and me; or choose, rather, between
Veru's barren kisses and my curse, for the child will die if the evil
eye be not averted by charms. Choose, I say; for, by my father's soul,
if this bastard half-a-man enters the house, I leave it!"
"Nay, mother! I did but suggest. Veru--"
"O Veru! Veru! I am sick of the name. 'Tis she who hath bewitched
thee; 'tis her evil eye--"
He interrupted her fiercely, seizing her by the wrist.
"Peace, I say, mother! Peace! I will not hear such words."
"They are true for all that. She _hath_ bewitched thee!"
They stood for a moment face to face, so like each other in their
anger and dread. Then the strong man quailed, and fled before her
words and his own thoughts. He was no wiser than his fellows, for all
the soft heart that betrayed him into progress; perhaps less so, since
the superstitions of his fathers enslaved his mind without controlling
his affections. He wandered into the fields once more, where the rows
of blossoming mustard sown among the wheat showed like a yellow sea
against the horizon, but close at hand broke the green gloom of the
earing corn in long, curling waves crested with gold--a sight dear to
husbandmen's eyes! Yet it brought no comfort to the dull ache in
Gunesh's heart, which drove him to finish work with the first excuse
of waning light.
The child was at least no worse. Perhaps the warmth had soothed its
pain; perhaps the feeble life was sinking silently; but the ignorant,
loving eyes that watched it knew not whether the stillness made for
sleep or death.
Save for Gunesh Chund and his wife the house was empty, for his mother
had sought the relief of words with a neighbouring crony.
"Veru," said Gunesh in a whisper, as if the darkening walls had ears,
"dost think the doctor might do her good? The mother will not have him
here--mayhap she is right--but I could take the child to him."
"O husband!" Brought face to face with decision, the woman shrank from
action. "I know not, and the mother would be so angry."
But the slower mind and warmer heart had been at work on the problem,
and ciphered it out once and for all.
"She need never know. Sit within, silent, as if thou hadst it still,
should she return. I shall not be long; so give the child to me."
Half fearful, half pleased at his decision, the mother shifted her
burden to his awkward arms. How small, how light it seemed, hidden
away in the folds of his flowing plaid-like shawl, as he passed
through the twilight alleys on his way to the camping-ground where, in
the mud caravanserai, the travelling vaccinator was to be found!
Neighbours, resting after the day's labour, called to him in various
greeting, and he paused to reply with dull patience, conscious always
of the unseen burden near his heart. So had he carried the firstling
lamb on the night when Nihali was born. How it had struggled to
escape, and sucked at his restraining hand in fierce desire for life!
A fear lest the child's quiet was death made him turn aside more than
once into a darker corner to look and listen.
Still with the same dull patience he sat down before the vacant room
in the serai to await the vaccinator's return; for patience and
doggedness are the peasant farmer's unfailing inheritance, not to be
reft from him by tyrants or strangers. Some camel-drivers, newly
arrived, were cooking their food at a blazing wood-fire in the open,
whence the flames threw long shadows, distorted out of all human
semblance, into the far corners of the court-yard, where a circle of
kneeling camels browsed upon a pile of green branches. Familiar sights
and sounds to Gunesh's eyes and ears, yet to-night, with that strange
burden near his heart, seeming out of place and unexpected.
Meanwhile Veru, with empty arms and nervous fingers twisting and
turning themselves on each other restlessly, was straining her eyes
into the darkness, and wondering with greater and greater insistence
what kept her husband. Her mother-in-law had not returned. She almost
wished she had, for the solitude and silence seemed unending. At last,
unable to endure the suspense any longer, she drew her veil tightly,
to avoid recognition, and stole like a shadow along the darkest side
of the street to meet Gunesh. But he, also weary of waiting, returned
from an unsuccessful pursuit of the doctor by another route. Thus no
reply came to his whispered call to Veru, as he stepped over the
threshold. What had happened? He repeated the call louder.
"Veru!--Mother! Is there no one in the house?"
His mother's voice answered him from behind, and he turned to her,
relieved; for all its lightness, the little burden at his heart grew
heavy in responsibility. Even in his mother's arms it seemed safer.
Two old women who had accompanied her, with the intention of making a
last appeal to common sense, looked at the child critically.
"Truly, O mother of Gunesha," said one, "'tis the evil eye; but there
is time yet to cast the devil out by fumigations."
"Without doubt," echoed the other. "I have seen children nearer death
than this, snatched from the grave by wisdom such as thine."
Gunesh Chund's mother looked at him, her triumph dimmed and softened
by appeal.
"Wilt kill the little thing by over-kindness?" she whispered. "See,
chance hath given her to us. Veru, poor fool, is away.--Let us work
the charm, Guneshwa. I worked it on thee when thou wast a sickly babe,
and see how strong and tall thou art."
He looked from one to the other doubtfully. What was he, an ignorant
man, to set his wishes against these wise mothers, when they assured
him of success? He gave a sign of assent, and set himself towards
authority should Veru come back ere the business was well over.
The old women turned to their task joyfully. The time was past, they
cackled, for any but robust measures, and life in Nihali's frail form
must be made unendurable to the devil without delay. For this purpose,
what more effectual than red pepper and turmeric? Swiftly, with
muttered charms, and many a deft passing through of this thing seven
times, and that seven times seven, the child was laid on a low,
strong-seated stool, in full blaze of the fire-light, while the
grandmother, bringing the drugs from her stores within, mixed them in
approved manner. An earthenware saucer filled with smouldering
charcoal served for brazier. Then, all being ready and placed beneath
the stool, a discordant chant was raised, and the powder flung on the
embers.
From the dense yellow smoke enveloping poor little Nihali came a
feeble, gasping cry.
"Mother!" pleaded the man, hiding his face.
"'Tis the devil cries," replied the stern old woman, flinging fresh
drugs on the coals.
A fainter cry came, echoed in a shriek from the door, where Veru
stood, paralyzed for an instant by rage and terror. The next, dashing
the witches aside with furious blows, coughing and suffocating in the
fumes, her empty, craving arms sought the child and found it--too
late! A sigh, a struggle, and the demon, or angel of life, had fled
forever.
Smarting and half blind with the foul smoke, Veru's eyes failed to see
the tall figure half hidden in the corner; but her voice seemed to
pierce him through and through.
"I gave her to Guneshwa! Where is he?"
Then, as the full extent of the result came home to her, shriek after
shriek rent the air, and she fell into one of the violent hysterical
fits so common among Indian women of all classes.
"The devil hath entered into _her_," said her mother-in-law, bitterly;
so the turmeric and red pepper came in handy.
Gunesh Chund, torn by a vague remorse, and uncertain what to think,
found his refuge in the dream-compeller. But while he dreamed under
the stars, on the roof that rose like a watch-tower above the village,
and Veru lay in the unconsciousness of exhaustion below, a strange,
ghastly scene was enacted in the outer court-yard, where the old women
flitted about with tiny oil lamps in their hands. Little Nihali,
dressed in her fine clothes, with bandy legs straightened and
struggling arms at rest, lay stiff on the string stool, with each tiny
palm clenched over a ball of raw sugar, and miniature cards of
cotton-wool, such as women prepare for their spinning, between each
finger. So armed with all female attractions, the sugar symbolizing
sweetness to a lover, the cotton diligence as a wife, Nihali was
ready, like a true woman, to sacrifice herself unconditionally in
order to bring sons to the hearth.
"Veru, of course, would not hear of this," said the stern grandmother
to her cronies, "and Guneshwa is fairly bewitched by her obstinacy.
Nevertheless, the opportunity shall not slip; for if the omens are
bad, I must give him another wife without delay."
So, in the darkest of the night, before the jackal's last cry heralded
the dawn, the three women slipped through the deserted streets. No
fear was on their faces, no huddling together or whispering; straight
in solemn order, as to a sacred duty, went the little procession,
headed by the tall, gaunt grandmother, bearing the dead baby in her
arms.
Past the still, shining pools of water girdling the village; beyond
the thorn enclosures; through the fields of wheat, till the village
common-land, a stretch of bare mud and low, sparse bushes, lay dim and
desolate around them.
"'Tis the nick of time," said one of the cronies, pointing to a grey
shadow slinking away from their steps; "now may the Great One send a
good omen!"
In an open spot surrounded by bushes Gunesh Chund's mother paused and
looked around.
"Here," she whispered, and the others nodded.
She stooped to lay the dead child on the ground, carefully placing it
so that the feet were from the village; then raising herself to her
full height, she stretched her right hand towards the horizon, as if
pointing out a road, repeating in a wild chant echoed by those behind
her:
"Thus we drive you forth, O daughter!
Come not back, but send a brother."
Swift and silent as they had come, they made their way back to the
village, leaving the dead baby alone, unwatched. For a while the night
was still; then soft pattering feet crept round Nihali, and fierce
eyes glared on her from the bushes; but Death held her in his arms
secure, and fear was over forever.
"Hist!" cried the retreating women, as the sobbing wail of the jackal,
beginning with a faint whine, rose louder and louder, till each bush
and brake seemed to give a voice to swell the horrid chorus.
They waited listening.
"Now may the omen be good!" said one.
"The dawn will show," replied the grandmother, calmly. "I will wait
here; go you home to bed."
But when the rising sun brought sufficient light to see withal, her
eager eyes could find no certain indication on which to build either
hope or fear. Marks there were, and plenty, showing where the beasts
had fought, but no broad track of dragging, either away from or
towards the village, conveying Nihali's last message to her friends.
Had she gone over the edge of the world seeking for the long-sought
son? Or had she come back to haunt the hearth with her unwelcome
presence? Who could tell?
"Everything goes wrong nowadays," muttered the discontented old woman.
"Even the omens fail! 'Tis all the fault of the great Queen and her
new-fangled notions."
The next three months brought Gunesh Chund many an uneasy hour. Even
when, driven to bay by his mother's entreaties to allow her to look
for a new wife, he confessed his promise to wait a year, he gained no
respite from her reproaches, but rather enhanced their venom by her
contempt for his weakness. What was he, to set himself above the
wisdom of his fathers? What was the reading-writing woman, that she
should run counter to the traditions which held the first duty of a
Hindu wife was to be that of bringing a son to the hearth? He had no
answer save a dull consciousness that somehow he was not quite as his
fathers. They, for instance, had calmly acquiesced in such customs as
the exposure of the dead child to the jackals; while, despite his
familiarity with the idea, its practice had filled him with aversion.
Honest as he was by nature, he never regretted the deceit which sent
Veru, after she recovered from the illness following on the shock of
her tears and offerings.
---------------------
---------------------
"'Twill only make her ill again to know what thou hast done," he had
said to his mother, with a decision new to him. "Silence will be the
wisest for thee also, since in this I am on her side."
As for the casting out of the demon which had hurried on the
inevitable end, Veru always maintained to her mother-in-law that it
partook of the nature of murder; but with her usual shrewdness she
exonerated Gunesh Chund from blame. For this he was grateful, though
his mind was by no means made up as to the rights and wrongs of the
question.
From this and many another problem he took refuge in the fields. The
fierce dry winds of summer blew with scorching heat, bringing with
them the necessity for a ceaseless watering of the crops. Many and
many a silent, peaceful hour he spent in the forked seat behind the
oxen, half asleep, half awake; while the well-wheel circled round he
circled round the wheel, and the great world circled round beyond him.
Whether it span swift or slow he knew not and he cared not.
Many an hour, too, he spent resting, smoking and talking, under the
shade of the one big mulberry-tree, while the greybeards wheezed out
their mouldy proverbs, and the lads listened with their mouths full of
the overripe dead-sweet fruit. A kindly, honest crew; mayhap not far
above the circling bullocks in mind or ambitions, but for the most
part without an ungenerous thought or unfriendly wish.
Or he would take his pipe down to the village _dharmsala_, where
strangers found a lodging and the inhabitants a debating club; but
here the goad of Fate hit keenly at times when the talk fell on the
coming settlement, and Kishnu's people would condole with him in
covert sneers. For Gunesh Chund had been accustomed, ever since his
father died, to have the first and last word in that assembly of
elders, and even his gentle self-depreciation could not fail to feel a
certain loss of authority. One night, after Kishnu's husband, his own
cousin, backed by some friends, had openly derided his opinion, and
talked big about changes in the future, Gunesh sat on longer than was
his wont among the elder men. They had been his father's friends, and
he turned to them instinctively for support. Yet as they sat, solemnly
crouched up on the high wooden bench which filled the rudely carved
veranda from end to end, no voice came from the darkness where they
showed grey and shadowy in their white drapery; almost formless, save
when every now and again a more vigorous pull at a pipe fanned the
embers in it to a glow, which lit up the lean, high-featured faces and
wrinkled hands.
And Gunesh, too, remained silent and perturbed, knowing well what was
in their thoughts. It was a relief when the hubble-bubble of the pipes
dropped into insignificance before a speech summoned up by neighbourly
nods and nudges. It came from the patriarch, whose palsied hand shook
as he stretched it forward.
"Listen, O Guneshwa, the _lumberdar_. Thy grandfather and I played
together as boys in the house of my father and his. But his father was
the _lumberdar_, and mine but an elder. If the seed of strife springs
in the village, whose task is it to root it out? Answer me, ye who
hear me!"
A murmur of approbation ran round the assembly, whereat the patriarch
went on in a louder key.
"If there be young, untutored cattle in the herd, whose duty is it to
see they do not gore the old? Answer ye who hear me!"
But Gunesh Chund, knowing of old the length to which this system of
exhortation could be extended, broke in quickly:
"Granted that 'tis my task, wouldst thou have me root out mine own
family?"
"Nay!" retorted the elder, laughing in proud anticipation of his own
joke, "I would have thee plant some more of the same stock.--Is it not
so, my brothers?"
This time a wheezy chuckle of assent came from the darkness, followed
by a fresh voice:
"A man without a son hath one life; a man rejoicing in a son hath
two."
Then another took up the parable.
"Aye! and four hands to boot, wherewith to root out weeds."
"The hundredfold wheat hath more stems than one," quoth a third.
"And a toddling child can drive bullocks," put in a fourth.
So in solemn adage ran the talk, with many a weighty pause, and many a
self-complacent wag of the head when the ball of ancient wit had been
successfully passed to the next neighbour.
Accustomed as he was to this style of reasoning, each remark was a
fresh tap driving the nail of conviction into Gunesh Chund's slow
brain. As he stood on the roof that night, whence he could see the
horizon strike the sky in one unbroken circle, a keen desire to live
as his fathers had lived excluded all other thoughts. Here was his
world; here lay his duty.
"Thou canst choose a wife for me if thou wiliest," he said sheepishly
to his mother, when, in the early dawn, he found her already at work,
while Veru lay abed with some ache or pain.
"O my son! O Guneshwa!" cried the old woman, flinging her arms
around his neck with unwonted tenderness, and with tears of joy in her
bright old eyes. "I will find thee a pearl and paragon. With a skin
wheat-coloured, and--"
"Nay, mother," interrupted the big man, still more sheepishly, "an'
she please thee, and have a soft tongue, that is all I care for. And,
mother, say no word to Veru yet. There is time; and mayhap thou wilt
not find a wife soon."
His mother laughed scornfully.
"Not find one to marry the _lumberdar!_ such a fine, straight man as
thou art, Guneshwa. Why, they will come in crowds! Nay, be not so
modest; that is the girl's part, not the man's. Nevertheless, as thou
sayst, 'tis time enough to tell Veru when all things are settled.
There is but one woman needed in a marriage."
If some rankling doubt as to the honesty of his silence lingered in
Gunesh Chund's mind, it vanished quickly before the personal peace
which his decision brought to the household.
Perhaps Veru might have wondered at the lull which thereinafter fell
over the combat, but that she herself was absorbed in a new hope of
victory, and thought it possible that her keen-eyed mother-in-law
might, in like manner, be preparing for defeat.
So the time of truce passed on; until one day, almost before Gunesh
had realized his own capitulation, his mother informed him that a
bride had been found.
"So soon!" he exclaimed, dismally. "O mother, take care! Sure the
choice of a plough-bullock would take me longer."
"Then 'tis time to tell Veru," was his only remark, when the beauties,
virtues, and charms of the young lady were dinned into his ears.
Whereupon his mother, with much inward contempt at his scruples, told
him curtly that she had purposely chosen a bride from a far country,
so that he need say nothing, since nothing would be known by others,
until the festivities began.
"I will tell her before then," he said, relieved; but somehow the days
passed by, leaving behind them the silence that they found.
Meanwhile Veru wearied Heaven with prayers and penances till she grew
thin and pale--given to fits of hysteria and tears, yet with a
triumphant look in her eyes as she listened to her mother-in-law's
constant allusions to her ill-health, with which the old lady
bolstered up Gunesh Chund's failing resolution. All three were too
much occupied with their own thoughts and secrets to notice anything
unusual in the bearing of the others; or if they did notice it,
naturally put the change down to vague suspicions, and so held their
own counsel more firmly.
The crops were fast turning russet and gold under the glare of
sunlight succeeding to the monsoon rains, when Gunesh Chund said
good-bye to his household for ten days, and rode by winding village
ways to the broad white road that carried Western civilization, in the
shape of a post-bag, through the district. Veru, clothed in madder and
indigo, stood on the roof to watch him out of sight; loath to lose
him, and regretting that she had not risked her secret ere he left.
How much more would she have regretted it had she known that her
husband's destination lay far beyond his usual bourne, the Central
Revenue Office, and that his bundle contained all things necessary
for the interchange of presents with a new bride! Meanwhile her
mother-in-law, stolidly at work below, wondered how any woman could be
so immodest as to show grief at a husband's departure. And Gunesh
Chund, riding between serried ranks of feather-topped maize and
swelling bosses of millet, thought of the coming harvest. In a way,
each and all were looking forward with eager desire to reaping what
they had sown; as if life held any other fate for humanity!
That same afternoon, Veru, unwilling to relax any of her efforts
because of her hopes, set off to worship a snake which frequented an
old ant-hill at the farther end of the village common. The day had
been one of extreme heat, and a yellow dust-haze hung over everything.
Dust above, below, around her; only the ant-hill, furrowed by
long-past rains into rugged pinnacles, rising clear and distinct. She
was a timid woman, unused to roaming so far, and she looked fearfully
around, dreading lest from one of the dark holes piercing the mound a
hooded head might rear itself and speak to her. Such things had been,
she knew; for beneath the veneer of unbelief the old superstitions
held her in thrall.
Hastily, yet carefully, lest evil should befall from any lack of
ceremony, she ranged her sugar-cakes, hung up her chaplet of flowers,
and sprinkled the milk she had brought in a little brass pot with a
lavish hand; it left dark, ominous-looking stains on the white dust.
Glad to escape from such weird surroundings, yet feeling the need of
rest, she drew aside among the wild caper-bushes, and sat down, wiping
the beads of perspiration from her forehead with the corner of her
veil. It felt quite hot against the damp skin, cooled by the fierce,
dry wind that even in this sheltered spot drove the dust along in
swirls. She drew her veil over her head and sat still as a statue, in
the curiously drooping attitude which to Western eyes suggests
absorbing grief; but Veru's mind was full of a great joy, which gained
no little sweetness from the thought of revenge. Yet as she dreamed
far away into the years, a spreading fold of her veil, caught in a
caper-thorn, seemed pointing to something that glistened among the
roots behind her. Veru, rising to go, stooped to disengage herself,
and saw--a baby's bracelet! The next instant, with a shrill,
high-pitched shriek of rage, she set off running towards the village.
Her mind, slow enough to take in novel ideas, needed no prompting
here. It was little Nihali's bracelet, and the explanation of this
fact followed as a matter of course. The dead child had been exposed
as an augury; _but what had the verdict been?_ Strange as it may seem,
that thought came uppermost. Doubtless, had the truth been told her in
the first freshness of bereavement, when the soft touch of the little
hands and the clinging of the lips were more than a memory,
indignation and horror at the outrage on her child might have overcome
her curiosity. At any rate, the desire to pose as an advanced woman
would have induced her to conceal it. But months had passed, bringing
a new hope, to ensure which her inherited instincts would gladly have
sacrificed more than a _dead_ girl. Indeed, the wish for some such
augury had more than once invaded her, and lo! the sign had been
given, and she knew nothing of it. That it had been favourable she
assumed, believing that otherwise her mother-in-law would have
hastened to make it known. Unheard-of spite and cruelty!--but if it
were the climax, it should also be an end to tyranny. Trembling with
excitement and the uneducated woman's desire for words, she ran
forward panting and breathless, with little cries of anger and grief,
until she sank down exhausted with the unwonted exertion and her own
emotions. When she arose again, it was with greater calmness but more
resentment.
Her mother-in-law was toasting the new-made dough-cakes by the fire,
when, after many pauses, Veru reached home. Wearied out, she leaned
against the door-jamb for support ere commencing the fray, and looked
at the elder woman with sombre, menacing eyes. The latter paid no
attention, but went on tossing aside the heat-blistered cakes, and
placing others upright in the embers till they blew out like bladders.
Suddenly Veru raised her hand; something gleaming flew through the
air, and the dead baby's bracelet fell at her enemy's feet and rolled
among the ashes.
"The jackals have sent thee a present, grandmother."
The old woman looked at it, startled; then sprang up and faced her
adversary in fiercest indignation.
"What hast thou done, fool? Bringing the curse of girls back to the
earth! The wild beasts were more merciful than thou art, for they gave
no sign; and see, where the bread is baking thou hast thrown the
augury. O Guneshwa! O my son! would that thou wert here to see this
witch casting her spells to bring barrenness to the bride thou art
wooing! But no matter; the old mother will avert them; so bring home
thy bride, Guneshwa! bring home the virtuous Kirpa Devi, daughter of
Kirpo Ram of Badrewallah!"
Veru, struck dumb by the possible consequences of her own act, as
revealed to her in her mother-in-law's unforeseen reproach, felt the
whole world turn round as the old woman, roused out of caution, let
loose her secret and her tongue without reserve.
"It is not true! it is not true! Guneshwa would never deceive me so!"
was all the poor creature found to say against the torrent of words
and facts.
"Not true!" echoed the other, remorselessly. "Come hither, and see if
it be not true that a wedding is nigh."
Seizing Veru by the wrist, she dragged her across the court-yard,
flung open the store-room door, which was kept jealously locked
against all intrusion, and pointed to a row of handkerchief-covered
basket-trays, ranged in order on the ground.
"Behold!" she cried, jeeringly, as she lifted the covering from one,
displaying a pile of cheap tinsel-decked garments, such as are made to
fill up the measure of more solid wedding presents. "Guneshwa's mother
is not so careless as his wife. Here is everything needful, and yonder
is the pile of dates whence he took the offering that went with him
to-day. Stay--thou canst read! Put thy scholarship to some use for
once, and see if it be not true."
But Veru did not take the letters thrust at her; the shock was too
great, following on her excitement and utter weariness. She swayed as
she stood, and with a cry of "O Guneshwa, bring the dates back! bring
them back!" she fell in a heap among the baskets.
In the dawn of the next day, her mother-in-law, as she lay down to
snatch a little sleep while one of her cronies watched by Veru's bed,
told herself that the house was cursed indeed! Who would have dreamed
of the gods bringing such hopes to Veru? Who would have thought of her
concealing them even for a day? And what a heritage of evil she would
leave behind her if she died now! Nihali's augury was bad enough, but
what chance would there be for the new wife if the ghost of an
expectant mother haunted the house?
Veru must not die--should not die; so the old woman nursed her
tenderly, and strove in her rough way to bring comfort to the mind
stricken by mad jealousy and resentment.
"I _will_ die," was the only response; "I will die and become a
---------------------
---------------------
"Hearken, O Veru," replied her mother-in-law at last, "thy dying will
not harm any one, for if thou diest ere Guneshwa returns, I swear he
shall never know a word, neither of thy hopes nor of thy fears! It
shall be silence, silence forever, and who fears a ghost he knows not
of? Answer me that!"
And Veru, gripped in the stern old woman's greater strength, could
only turn her face to the wall sullenly.
"Hast thou no message for Guneshwa?" asked the watcher at the last, as
Veru lay sinking.
"None--that--thou--wouldst--give," came the reply, with a strange
smile that remained on the lips even after death.
"Now, thank God, neither Guneshwa nor his bride need know aught of
this!" thought the old lady, as they streaked the corpse with many a
weird ceremony and precaution.
The moon shone brightly as Gunesh Chund rode through the village
common on his homeward way. There was scarcely a track to be seen on
the hard, white ground, where the sparse bushes close at hand lay like
shadows here and there, but in the distance blended themselves into a
grey line against the lighter sky. No visible track, yet the
_lumberdar's_ pony picked its way unerringly, true as the needle,
towards the manger awaiting it; instinct or habit supplying the place
of reason. Its rider could boast of no such contented certainty.
Something--what, he would have been puzzled to say--had made the path
of custom seem doubtful, without supplying him with a new or clearer
road. And, overlying the dull sense of discomfort, was a distinct
remorse for the deceit to which his honest if sluggish soul was quite
a stranger. The memory of his promise troubled him, although he quite
acknowledged that a _pudmuni_, or ideal Hindu wife, would never have
claimed its fulfilment.
Suddenly his pony started and swerved, throwing him forward in his
shovel stirrups.
In his efforts to keep in his seat the cause seemed to be the sudden
appearance of a veiled woman, beckoning with outstretched hands; but
when he could give a calmer look, the difference in position caused by
his pony's advance showed him that it was but the dead trunk of a
tree. With a sign of relief he gave the animal a dig in the sides.
"'Tis thinking so much of women-folk does it," he said to himself. "I
weary for the ploughing and peace."
A sense of well-being came over him at the familiar sights and sounds,
as he neared the village. Even the dogs barking in chorus at the
pony's echoing steps seemed to him a welcome, and the house, quiet
and dark though it was, a haven of rest after the hustle and bustle of
his rapid excursion into an unknown world. The door of the inner court
was closed, for he was not expected till dawn, and he stood for an
instant beside it, listening. All was still as death, and with another
sigh of relief he stumbled up the steep stairs to his favourite
sleeping-place.
How calm it was there under the stars; how clear the path, now that he
was at home once more among familiar landmarks! Why, if difficulties
arose, had they not arisen over and over again in the lives of those
who had gone before him? What more easy than to adopt the ancient
remedy, and, by building a new court for the new wife, separate the
jealous women! His mother would, of course, side with her own choice;
so Veru, far from having any ground of complaint, would find greater
peace than heretofore. In his quiet, limited way, he loved her more
than he would have cared to avow, and so, thinking of her ease, he
fell asleep full of content.
The night passed, the dawn lightened into sunshine; yet still he
slept, wearied out by his ten days' exile from the village. And so it
came to pass that his mother, apprised of his return by finding the
pony in its accustomed place, had to rouse him by sad words.
"Awake, O Gunesh Chund, son of Anant Ram, and make thy heart strong,
for Veru thy wife is dead."
A sad amaze, an almost pitiful resignation, followed the first
incredulity; and then, as he sat below, patiently waiting for many a
rite and conventional lamentation, the memory of his last waking
thought returned to him.
"I thought of building her a new house for peace' sake," he said,
wistfully, to his mother; "and lo! the Great Ones have given her a
grave and peace forever."
"Perhaps 'tis as well, Guneshwa!" replied the old woman, softened by
his gentle grief. "Her health was poor, and if Death drew nigh, it was
better he should come before the bride."
Perhaps 'twas as well! That was all her tongue found to say, but her
heart rejoiced exceedingly that eternal silence had fallen over the
dead wife's reproaches. If Premi and Chuni only held their tongues, as
they always did if it was made worth their while, neither Gunesh Chund
nor his bride need know the curse that had come upon them. Above all,
the soft-hearted bridegroom would be saved the daily terror of seeing
the fatal ghost.
Even as it were, the autumn chills were upon him, making him shiver
and shake, and bringing the haggard, ague-stricken look so common at
that time of year to his sad face. He took little interest in the
preparations which his mother pressed on with feverish haste, but
passed days and nights out of doors among his fields, going the round
of the crops with the village accountant, and seeing to the payment of
revenue dues.
"Thou takest no rest, Gunesh Chund," exclaimed his mother,
indignantly, when he pleaded business as an excuse for not going to
the silversmith's to hurry him up with the remodelling of poor Veru's
ornaments. "A _lumberdar_ was a _lumberdar_ long before the _sahibs_
came to the land. What is it to thee if they want this written one
way, and that another? There were no such piles of papers in thy
father's day, and he was a better _lumberdar_ than thou wilt ever be."
"Mayhap, mother; but somehow 'tis ill work nowadays doing things as
they used to be done. It suits no one, not even thee."
"Not suit me--I'd like to know--"
"Nay! are not the old trinkets being altered even now. For my part, I
liked them best as they were."
"Guneshwa thou art a ninny! But thou wilt sing another song when the
bride comes to thee adorned. That new silversmith hath done well.
There is a fashion of necklet--French pattern he called it--like
needlework for fineness. And I have not forgotten the old ways, for
the talisman Veru wore is made into a _saukinmhora_, to keep her ghost
away."
The _lumberdar's_ face assumed a startled, alarmed look.
"The ghost, mother! Wherefore the ghost? Veru was a good wife, loving
me, and I was a good husband to her. There was no ill-will betwixt us,
surely."
His mother could have bitten her tongue out for her inadvertence.
"'Twas but a thoughtless word, O my son, and I am over-anxious. Surely
the woman took too many blessings from thee in life to give thee
curses in death. And see," she added, hastily, in the hope of
diverting his eager anxiety, "I have found what thou wert asking
for--the certificates of thy fathers to many and many a generation.
Thou hadst given them into Veru's keeping, but they are too precious
for a woman's holding. Who knows but she has lost some? Squandering
thy son's heritage out of spite! Who canst give back the praises of
the dead?"
So she went on in purposeful grumbling, while Gunesha, opening the
handkerchief in which the precious documents were folded, counted the
frayed papers laboriously.
"Nay! they are here, and more; let me count again. Surely, there are
thirty-and-two, and when the canal _sahib_ gave me his last year there
were but thirty-and-one. Thirty-and-one, no more."
He sat down on the door-step, shifting the papers through his awkward
hands, with the uncertain eyes of one who, being unable to read, has
to seek recognition through more devious ways. His mother, meanwhile,
utterly indifferent, had turned to some household occupation.
"See, there is a new one; that one, may be; 'tis cleaner than the
rest," he muttered to himself, opening up the folded sheet conspicuous
by its whiteness.
It was written in the Nagari character, and his puzzled face cleared
at the sight.
"'Tis all right, mother!" he exclaimed; "there are but thirty one. The
other is a letter."
He was about to add a suggestion that Veru might have written it, but
checked himself, from fear of starting another tirade against the dead
woman.
"A letter!" echoed his mother, contemptuously. "Throw it in the fire!
I have no patience with folk who find their tongues too short to touch
friend or foe."
"But, mother," returned Gunesh, with a smile, "even thy tongue is not
long enough to reach over the world."
"And wherefore should I try? I tell thee, Guneshwa, that we
peasant-folk have naught to do with the world. What he can touch with
his hands is a man's portion till he dies, and 'tis theft to go
beyond. Writing is no good except for certificates. There is Devi
Ditta's house thrown into grief, just as the boy's betrothal began, by
the news of his father being killed in Burma. God knows where Burma
is. Far enough, may be, to keep the news back till a more convenient
time, if it came as God meant it to come. And the man is dead,
anyhow."
But Gunesh Chund refolded the paper and placed it in his waistband.
His friend the accountant could tell him its purport.
"The chills again?" asked his mother, with no anxiety in her voice,
when, coming back from Devi Ditta's house with a throat rendered
hoarse by neighbourly lamentations, she found her son huddled up under
his quilt. "You must get the sahib's white powder. For a wonder, it
does good."
"Quinine will not cure me, mother," he replied in a curiously muffled
voice that startled the hearer by its dull despair.
"What ails thee, then, Guneshwa?"
The man sat up amid his heavy wrappings and looked at her without
resentment. The ague cramped his blue fingers, and made him draw
shuddering breaths through widely distended nostrils, as he sat gazing
at her with wild eyes full of a mute appeal and reproach. Then, with a
little, almost childish cry, he fell back among the quilts once more.
"Thou knowest, mother; thou knowest it well."
Her heart throbbed, but her voice was steady as she replied:
"What do I know, O Gunesh Chund?"
"That Veru kept her promise and I broke mine! She knew you would not
tell me, so she wrote. That was the letter."
The old woman stood for an instant bewildered. Then, as she realized
that all her wisdom had not availed against the dead wife's knowledge,
she threw her lean arms up over her head and beat her hands together
wildly, while the court re-echoed with her high, resonant voice.
"She wrote it? Now may God curse her utterly! My curse upon her and
every woman who learns--"
A shivering hand reached out towards her.
"Hush, mother! I have had enough of curses to-day."
The mild reproof made her forget her anger in thoughts for him.
"Light of mine eyes! heart of my heart!" she cried, flinging herself
on her knees by the bed and stretching the arms, but now raised in
cursing, around him in fierce protecting. "She cannot hurt thee--she
dare not, if charms avail. The iron rings are about her hands and
feet, the nails are through her cursed, writing fingers--would God
they had been there ere she wrote that letter!--and the mustard-seed
lies thick between her grave and the hearth. I have sown it, and will
sow it with each new moon. Look up, Guneshwa! She cannot, she dare not
return."
"She hath returned already."
The old woman rose with a gesture of despair.
"Say not so! Break not thy mother's heart with idle words. 'Tis but
the chills, and thou hast them often. The powder will cure them."
"Perhaps 'tis so," he replied, listlessly. "But I have seen her. Ere
ever I knew of her death she met me on the common as I rode home. Nay,
weep not so soon; the truth will be told ere long, and there will be
time enough for tears then."
"There will be no need to weep at all, my son," she said, crushing
down her own dread in order to lessen his, and fiercely determining to
shed no more tears till life held nothing else.
She kept her word; though, as the days passed on, even her wilful
blindness could not fail to see how the strong man grew weaker and
weaker. Her heart stood still with fear, as she watched for the sleep
of exhaustion which followed each successive attack of fever and ague,
before stealing away to seize the opportunity for the charms she dared
not work save in secrecy.
Indeed, the subject was barred between them; and even when the fever
fiend held him in its grip, Gunesh Chund never alluded again to the
fatal ghost.
He put aside the _saukin-mhora_ which, in her clutching at straws, she
would have had him wear as a talisman, with quite a broad laugh.
"Wouldst have me altogether a woman, mother?" he asked, cheerfully. "I
deemed instead I was too soft for thee. But see! whether it be the
chills or the other thing, Death will come if he is on the road."
For all the courage of his words, a conviction that he was doomed
dulled his interest in all things save his fields, and when he grew
too weak to find his way there and back his patience broke into
restlessness.
"I will go and stop at the well, mother," he said at last; "the air is
freer out there, and I weary to death looking at these dull mud
walls."
So, leaning on his mother's arm, Gunesh Chund, the _lumberdar_, made
his way for the last time down the village street, to meet Death in
the open.
"It is good to be here," he said, with peace in his face and heart, as
he lay day after day, gazing with dull, contented eyes at the broad
expanse of newly-tilled soil, where the sun gleamed on the furrows.
The birds chattering in the mulberry-tree overhead, and the ceaseless
babble of the life-giving water flowing past him, filled his ears with
familiar comfort. There was nothing here to puzzle his slow brain;
nothing to disturb a nature welded, by long centuries of toil under
the sunny skies, into perfect accord with its environment.
So his mother, coming back from her unavailing spells, found him one
day looking out over the springing crops with sightless eyes and
placid face.
"I might have saved him," she said to herself with infinite
bitterness, as from the sleeping-place on the roof she watched the
smoke of his funeral pyre drift away into the cloudless blue--"I might
have saved him but for the letter. Oh, curses, curses, ten thousand
curses on those who taught her to write! Curses to all eternity on all
new-fangled ways!"
Once more her lean brown arms flung themselves in wild appeal towards
heaven, as she stood out against the sky facing the future--old,
sonless, hopeless.
"Willie," Mark Twain tells us, "had a purple monkey climbing up a
yellow stick"; he further informs us that this quadruman made its
owner "deathly sick."
The following story shows the effect that a blue monkey on a gilt
spike had in a remote Indian village called Jehadpore--a very ordinary
village set out on high, unirrigated soil, beside a large irregular
tank, whence the bricks of many generations of houses had been dug;
the only peculiarity about it being a glaringly whitewashed mosque
facade, rising above the whole and flanked by a palm-tree. Merely a
facade: viewed frontwise, distinctly imposing, with minarets and domes
in orthodox numbers and positions; viewed sidewise, as distinctly
disappointing. The jerriest of London jerry builders could have done
nothing better than this one brick front elevation, of which even the
domes were but _basso-relievos_.
Still it dominated the village in every way; for it was built in the
court-yard of ex-Rissaldar-Major Azmutoollah Khan Sahib Bahadur's
house, and he with his hangers-on represented Jehadpore. It was a
Rangur village--that is to say, a village of Mohammedan Rajputs, a
race which supplies half the native cavalry of upper India with
recruits. That was the case at Jehadpore. When the district officer
came round every year to attest and write up the big village note-book
there was always something to add on this score. Either the number of
those away a-soldiering had to be increased, or an entry made that
these occasions the district officer invariably found an escort
awaiting him at the boundary, consisting of _sowars_ on leave
from various regiments (with their horses), a contingent of
"_pinson-wallahs_" in nondescript uniform on broodmares, and Khan
Azmutoollah Khan Bahadur, C.I.E., ex-_rissaldar_, at their head. He
was a very old man, as deeply wrinkled as a young actor doing the part
of an ancient retainer. In the privacy of that court-yard, garnished
by the jerry mosque, he clothed himself scantily in limp white muslin,
and his beard was tricoloured--white at the roots, red in the middle,
purple at the ends. But on his screaming stallion, sword in hand, a
goodly row of medals on his worn tunic, Azmutoollah's beard was of the
fiercest black, and the line of moustache shaved from the hard mouth
into an arched curve under his aquiline nose, curled right up to his
eyes. His voice, too, lost its quaver of age, and before he had safely
inducted the _Huzoor_ into his tents down by the tank that irregular
three ordinary field days. It was the old soldier's _Kriegspiel_.
---------------------
---------------------
When it was over, and he dozed, wearied out by the unaccustomed
effort, on the wooden bed under the _nim_-tree, the hard roly-poly
bolster tucked in to the hollow of his neck--or something else--made
his sleeping-place a Bethel, and he dreamed dreams.
Then he had to resume the old uniform once more and go over to the
tents again with a petition. Rangurs always have petitions about
wells, or water, or brood mares; for, if they make excellent troopers,
they are intolerably bad ploughmen. That was why Mool Raj, the
hereditary money-lender of Jehadpore, was able to send his son,
Hunuman Sing, to college and make a pleader of him.
The ex-_rissaldar_, with two sons and three grandsons in the old
regiment, waxed contemptuous over the "pleadery" career. But that was
his attitude in all things towards Mool Raj and the small Hindu
element the latter represented in Jehadpore. The fact that the
Mohammedan population to a man was in the usurer's debt did not affect
the position of affairs at all, or detract from the feeling of
virtuous tolerance which allowed a most modest and retiring Hindu
temple to conceal itself behind the back wall of the mosque facade. It
Jehadpore. The place was a perfect hot-bed of fighting Mohammedanism,
which only needed opposition to grow into fanaticism.
---------------------
---------------------
Yet, when Mool Raj added a new story to the Hindu temple, nobody said
him nay. They were good friends with the wizened, monkey-like usurer.
"_Bismillah!_ Khan Sahib," laughed one of the group of _sowars_ round
Azmutoollah's wooden bed. "He saith it is to save his soul from sin.
God knows he needs it, for he hath charged me rascally interest on my
last debt. If we must needs have a Hindu in the place, seeing God and
his Prophet forbid the true believer to soil his hands with usury,
then, by the _Imams_, let us have a pious one!"
Even when he put a gilt spike on the top they spoke of it in
contemptuous kindness. "Whether he buries our gold or sets it on high
is all one, so long as he hath enough to lend us when we seek it. And
'tis thank-offering, he says, for his son Hunuman passing as B.A. God
knows what that may be, but the boy hath thin legs and a narrow
chest."
Azmutoollah Khan, C.I.E., looked distastefully at the extreme tip of a
gilt spike which from the farthermost corner of the court-yard showed
just over the facade.
"So far well," said the old martinet. "A Hindu may have repentance,
and he is like to ourselves in affection for his family--though, Allah
But that is an end of repentance and affection. I will have no
idolatrous spike under my eyes, and so I will tell Mool Raj. Let
Hunuman build himself a temple in Lahore out of his scholarships and
pleader's fees. We want none of his kind in Jehadpore."
---------------------
---------------------
The usurer came back from his interview with his patron quite
resigned. To tell the truth, he himself was not much set on these
pious additions which cost a heap of hard-won money. Their initiator
was Hunuman's mother, who, ever since her pilgrimage to Shah Sultan
had been rewarded by the long-prayed-for son, had looked on him as
doubly dependent on the favour of the gods--his very name, Hunuman,
having been bestowed on him because she had seen a monkey when she
first regained consciousness after the curious hysterical crisis which
seizes on most women at that most famous shrine. The inference being,
of course, that the monkey god was responsible for the baby--a
presumption not in the least weakened by the fact that Shah Sultan was
a Mohammedan saint to whom monkeys and gods were an abomination.
Chand Kor, therefore, gave shrill disapproval to Azmutoollah's fiat.
In her heart of hearts she nourished the ideal of a blue monkey god
perched on the top of that golden spike; and when, two days
afterwards, Hunuman Sing, B.A., came down for his vacation, she poured
the tale of intolerance into his ear.
Now, Hunuman Sing, after the manner of his kind, did not care--well,
what the Iron Duke said cost him twopence--for his godfather, nor,
indeed, for most of the beliefs of his mother. How could he? Who could
expect it of him? The cry which goes up now and again in India when
some clever lad, educated at a mission-school, openly forsakes his
religion, is beneath contempt. There is not one orthodox Hindu father,
north or south, who, pushing his lad on for the sake of worldly
success, does not do it with his eyes open to the inevitable gulf
which must separate them in the future. This particular son was like
many another son of the sort; a good lad, on the whole, if more
interested in his own development than anything else in the world.
This, again, was inevitable. When you have to cram the evolution of
ages into two-and-twenty years, and grow from a baby named after the
monkey god into a B.A., a strict attention to business is necessary.
If he was pushing, was not that also inevitable? Jonah's gourd had to
push "some," as the Americans say. For the rest, he was like hundreds
of the amiable, clever young graduates whom one longs to have in the
desert for forty days and nights opposite the Sphinx. One by one, of
course; for if there were two of them they would form a sub-committee
and vote the Sphinx to the chair. Then the millennium would come, of
course, and that would be inconvenient for _nous autres_.
But, though Hunuman cared not at all for the blue monkey god, he
worshipped liberty--especially his own; and he preferred it, if
possible, with a flavour of law about it. What! deprive a citizen, a
subject of the Queen Empress, from due exercise of religious right?
Who was Azmutoollah Khan, to promulgate such a pernicious attempt at
intimidation?--_vide_ section so-and-so.
Little Mool Raj, who seemed to shrivel smaller as he grew older,
listened to all this with great pride but steadfast inaction. He knew
who Azmutoollah Khan was well enough. He knew the temper of the people
who had enriched him all too well. Liberty was a fine thing, but money
was better--peace and comfort best of all. This latter conviction,
however, made him give way slightly before Chand Kor's tears; and the
next evening, when the _rissaldar_--major was interviewing two new
arrivals on leave, and bringing the wisdom of a lifetime to bear on
their horses, an odd noise floated over the sham domes of the mosque.
"Tis a donkey with the strangles, Khan Sahib," remarked Rahmat Ali.
"Yea, mine is a lucky one--five curls and--" He paused.
No, it was not a donkey. What was it? A camel snoring? A cow dying?
The women servants baking bread in the corner stood up to listen. The
two boys, heads down, arms interlaced, wrestling stark naked in the
sun, paused also. Then, suddenly, as if by mistake, an inconceivable
gamut, beginning with an earthquake, passing on to a foghorn, and
ending with a pennywhistle, let itself loose.
"God and his Prophet," yelled Azmutoollah, "it is a conch!"
As they stood petrified by the audacity, the low grunting recommenced,
and then once more something let go, lost control over itself, and
went skirling up like a burst bagpipe.
"My sword!" gasped the ex-_rissaldar_. "The idolatrous defiler of the
faith--the desecrator of my fathers' graves! A conch in Jehadpore! By
the Lord who made me, 'tis the last!"
If the opponents had been better matched, there would have been
bloodshedding in the village on that calm evening; but what could a
dozen _sowars_ with drawn swords, headed by Azmutoollah, joined by
half the populace of the village, do against Hunuman Sing, who, with a
trembling in his knees but the courage of martyrs in his mind, stood
on the steps of the temple, nearly bursting himself in his efforts to
play the unwonted instrument?
A roar of laughter went up from the crowd, as, alarmed but determined,
he backed from the onslaught to the temple door, stumbled on the step,
sat down violently, and the concussion sent a perfectly supernatural
"Ker--whoo--oo--oo--oo--ph!" through the conch.
Even Azmutoollah's indignation could not withstand it.
"Go, Rahmat Ali, and take it from him ere he do himself an injury, and
seek Mool Raj, Kutb-u-din. 'Tis his blame, not the boy's."
But Hunuman was on his feet again, full of outraged importance. The
affair to him was deadly earnest.
"I am no boy, Khan Azmutoollah, but of legal age, with B.A. pass. I am
a loyal citizen of Victoria Kaiser-i-hind. Religious liberty enjoins
me to play conch if I choose, and I do choose."
The spirit was willing, but the flesh, in the hustling hands of half a
dozen troopers, was perforce weak. The Hindu is not naturally
resistant, and the fighting men around him were not slow to recognize
Hunuman's unusual show of determination.
"It is assault! it is battery! I am coerced. I claim my rights. The
law is on my side!" he gasped, between his struggles.
"Smash the blasphemous thing, and let the boy go," called Azmutoollah.
"Enough, Hunuman-ji. Seek thy law elsewhere--not here, in the house of
my fathers."
The conch lay shivered to atoms, but the young man felt himself master
of the situation. Just as the concussion of his fall had forced his
breath into the conch, so the pressure of illegal coercion made his
newly acquired love of freedom overflow into eloquence. Heart and head
were both full to inflation with the finest sentiments. As he stood on
the steps, haranguing the people, he would have done credit to the
House of Commons in a party discussion.
"By the faith, he speaks well! 'Tis a pity his shoulders are so
narrow," remarked a trooper, carelessly, as he strolled away to a
bare, beaten patch by the tank, where a number of naked boys were
standing in pairs, heads down, hands on knees, smacking their thighs,
and crying "Hull-la-la!" to give themselves courage ere closing for
the grip. Beneath the skeleton of a peepul-tree hard by, whence the
branches had been stripped for fodder, some elders were at work over
gymnastic exercises, swinging clubs, or--supported on palms and
feet--touching the dust with their foreheads, and then rising again
like a strung bow. The sunlight shone on their bronze sinews.
"Didst kill him?" asked one, breathlessly keeping the count of his own
performance.
"Kill him? Look you, Allah Baksh--there was not enough of him to
kill!"
And a chuckle ran round the assembly.
A fortnight after, when the district officer was playing whist with
the policeman, the doctor, and the young assistant, who was gradually
being taught that rules are occasionally more honoured in the breach
than the observance, Dhunput Rai, judicial assistant, sent in to ask
five minutes' leisure of the _Huzoor_. Every one laid down his cards
at once, and the doctor lit a fresh cigar, for Dhunput Rai was one of
those natives of the old school who many a time and oft have steered
the British bark safely through troubled waters, as their fathers
steered the alien armadas of the Mogul. He was a Brahman of the
highest caste, keen-witted, clear-sighted; privately a bigot, publicly
a statesman.
"_Huzoor_," he said, briefly, "young Lala Amr Nath the Extra hath this
day in a case given leave for a conch to be blown in Jehadpore. There
will be trouble. In my opinion, it is a fitting occasion for the
_Huzoor_ to act under section 518, which gives absolute power to the
district officer in emergency."
Five minutes afterwards, Dhunput Rai took his leave with an interdict
in his pocket, and a deputy inspector of police and four mounted
constables rode out with it post haste, so as to arrive before the
earliest blink of dawn made conch-blowing compatible with anything
save sheer malice aforethought. It was a great blow to Hunuman and a
small circle of select college friends who had assembled to witness
the triumph of religious freedom. They consoled themselves during the
interval of appeal by writing an article to the 'Sun of Asia,' in the
course of which they promulgated several valuable new discoveries,
such as that there was one law for the rich and another for the poor.
Azmutoollah, meanwhile, admitted grudgingly that there was some sense
left in the _sahibs_ still, in spite of their setting goldsmiths'
sons, like Amr Nath, to rule over honest folk.
"I'm dashed if I can find a precedent," remarked the district officer,
disconsolately talking over the matter with the policeman, the doctor,
and the assistant. "And in a case like this, where every thing depends
on the environment, and it's sure to be appealed again, there is no
mortal good in anything but a precedent. If I say there will be a row,
I shall only be told with great dignity that Mr. Smith is expected to
keep his district in order."
There was a pause. Finally, the doctor spoke. He hailed from Aberdeen.
"It's an ill burd that files his ain nest, but for religious
into-lerance give me Scotland. Aw'm no saying ut'll hold as a
preeceedent amongst the heathen, but it's a preeceedent in the Court
o' Session. It was _aprepaw_ of a bell."
"A bell! Heaven be praised! the very thing."
"A bell is not a conch," remarked the assistant.
"Alias, I should say," murmured the policeman. "Bell, conch, call to
prayer: that's the spirit. Fire away, old chap!--Bearer, bring the
doctor-_sahib_ another peg."
So the precedent of a far-away cathedral, whose schismatic chime
annoyed good Calvinists, was brought to bear on Hunuman and the conch,
and the latter, not being an integral part of public worship, was
proclaimed a nuisance.
The deputy commissioner himself had no doubt about its being one, as
he wiped the perspiration from his brow, and remarked to Dhunput Rai
that that ought to finish the business.
The courteous old gentleman smiled.
"_Huzoor_," he said, "I have heard my father say that Akbar's order to
his judges was, 'Write ever with the pen which has been cut by the
sword; then there is peace in the land.' The case will be appealed,
and the pen of the _Huzoors_ is cut by machine."
He was a true prophet. Hunuman, backed by the 'Sun of Asia,' not only
appealed the conch question, but raised another in the interim by
putting a small blue plaster monkey on the top of the gold spike, in
fulfilment, it was urged, of the pre-natal vow made for him by his
mother, a pious Hindu lady, whose virtuous life was crowned with
honour.
The monkey remained there exactly five-and-twenty minutes after the
first beams of the rising sun disclosed the fact that it had been put
there during the night. That it remained so long was due to three
reasons: First, that the Jehadpore troopers, if good swordsmen, were
uncommonly bad shots; second, that Azmutoollah's blunderbuss was a
flint-lock; third, that he insisted on letting it off himself until it
knocked him down.
This time the case was taken direct to the deputy commissioner, who,
urged on the one side by a remembrance of Dhunput Rai's remark, and on
the other by a sneaking fear of revision, decided that the blue
monkey, as an idolatrous image, was a distinct nuisance when displayed
unnecessarily over the top of a Mohammedan gentleman's private mosque.
On the other hand, viewed from the Hindu standpoint, the image of a
blue monkey might be an integral part of public worship. Azmutoollah
Khan Bahadur, C.I.E., ex-rissaldar, must therefore pay over to Mool
Raj and to Hunuman Sing the price of the destroyed blue monkey, as
they might wish to erect a similar one in a less conspicuous place.
Now, though Mool Raj's name was duly entered in the file as
complainant, the affair had long ago passed out of his hands and
become a real, solid, Heaven-sent grievance to a small knot of
advanced young pleaders. Indeed, the old man was so distinctly
unsatisfactory as chief victim, that they had more than once taken the
opportunity of his absence to advance matters a step. Azmutoollah
Khan, as shrewd an old soldier as could be found on either side of the
Indus, was not slow to notice this, and his blind opposition covered a
great longing to have these youngsters on the hip. After all, he and
Mool Raj had pulled along well enough for years before this B.A. was
thought of--ay, and their fathers before them. If the usurer had been
alone, the money screw could have been put on him somehow; since he
would not risk a pice for all the blue monkeys in heaven or on earth.
Azmutoollah Khan was cogitating these matters one afternoon on the
wooden bed, with his turban as usual standing like a helmet beside
him, when a party of boys rushed into the court-yard full of news and
excitement. Hunuman Sing, who, as every one knew, had come with some
friends in a bullock cart that morning, must have brought the thing
with him; but as sure as fate there was a blue monkey sitting on the
square pedestal in front of the temple which Alla Ditta, the mason,
had built in all innocence of heart last week--a blue monkey, not a
miniature marionette at the top of a gilt spike like the last, but a
life-sized affair, and, what is more, all the Hindus in the place and
many more from neighbouring villages were doing _poojah_ to it.
The fierce old Mohammedan's very lips turned pale. He never even
thought of his turban, but, bald-headed as he was, and stumbling in
his haste, was out of the court-yard into the narrow street. The next
minute a cry, that was not pleasant to hear, cut the calm sunshine
like a sword.
"_Jehad! Jehad! Futt-eh Mohammed! Jehad! Jehad! Futt-eh Mohammed!_"
shrilled the boys in refrain.
A knot of young men in patent-leather shoes, standing by the blue
monkey, heard the cry with a glow of triumph.
"Brothers and sisters," called one, in the polished, curiously
artificial tones of one accustomed to public speaking, "remember we
are peaceable citizens. There is to be no opposition. Our trust is in
truth and justice, not in violence. Our weapon is right, not might.
Stand aside and let them do their worst. 'I will repay,' saith the
law."
It was a bold paraphrase lost on all save that little knot of culture
which said, "Hear, hear!" as if to the manner born. The speech,
however, though admirable, proved somewhat superfluous. The first
sight of that mad assault coming round the corner sent the crowd,
composed for the most part of women and children, scattering hither
and thither like frightened sheep. Culture stood firm, unwisely firm,
for a minute. Then a voice rose in English:
"Gentlemen, discretion is better part of valour--nor is it permissible
to foster or excite breach of peace. We can speak with equal fluence
and freedom from roof of house." And they did.
The scene thus described sounds farcical. There was not even a grain
of comedy in it to the actors; least of all to the plaster monkey on
whose blue hide the sabres hacked fast. Above, on the roof, as on a
hustings, the new culture wielded the sword of the Spirit; below, the
older cult clinched argument by the sword of the flesh.
That night peace reigned in Jehadpore. Young India, in a body, had
gone to report wilful destruction of private property accompanied by
violence, to the deputy commissioner. Old India sat triumphant but
thoughtful on the wooden bed, while the troopers laughed and drank and
made merry over the discomfiture of the blue monkey.
"By the Prophet," cried Rahmat Ali, "I swear it had a look of old
money-bags! And why not, seeing 'tis the father of Sri Hunuman? Ha-ha!
But thou shouldst have seen the old man's face, _rissaldar-sahib_,
when he returned but half an hour gone, and I told him we were but
waiting leisure to burn his books and clear off old scores in the old
way. He wept, and said 'twas none of his doing; that he asked but
peace, as in the old days. Yea, as he sat a-begging on his haunches,
praying forgiveness, he looked more like the blue monkey than ever."
Khan Azmutoollah Khan let off a detonating _roulade_ of Arabic
anathema as a _Te Deum_.
"Fetch him here, Rahmat! I have a plan. We old folk will settle it old
ways."
The next morning the deputy commissioner, the police officer, and the
doctor rode out in hot haste to the scene of what they were told had
been a bloodthirsty riot. At the village boundary they were met,
rather to their surprise, by the usual escort. The leader of the
little band was more military than ever, but there was an odd twinkle
in his eye as he obeyed the curt order to fall behind, and the
hint--which British majesty gave in the interests of law and
order--that his presence even there was undesirable. Hunuman Sing, and
a friend who had remained to see fair play, certainly seemed to think
the troopers jingling and clashing along in close order very much in
their way. They edged their ponies here and there, only to find
themselves perpetually ridden over; especially when, at the head of
the lane leading to the temple, British majesty reined up short, the
troop behind turned to stone, the horses on their haunches steady as
rocks. Then there was a wild hustle; the two ponies shot out in front,
where their owners managed to pull up flabbergasted at the sight which
met their eyes.
"How is this?" asked the deputy commissioner, sternly. "I thought you
said the blue monkey was destroyed; and there it is, in perfect
condition!"
There it was, indubitably--bright blue, with a long tail curving over
its legs.
From behind among the troopers came gentle grunts of disapproval, that
the ears of the _Huzoor_ should be assailed with such wanton lies.
Blue monkeys indeed! What quarrel had the faithful with blue monkeys?
"Khan Azmutoollah Khan sahib," called British majesty, "what does this
mean? I was told you and your fellows had wantonly destroyed Mool
Raj's monkey. Is this true?"
The old man rode up from behind, his martial dignity undimmed by the
discipline he respected and understood.
"I am no scholar myself, _Huzoor_," he said, saluting, "but I am a
just man for all that. I injure neither man nor beast wantonly. Let
the _Huzoor_ ask the blue monkey if it or its master hath aught
against me. Of these"--here he gave a contemptuous wave of his hand to
the pleaders on their ponies--"I know naught, nor did my fathers."
Then he rode forward. "Oh, _bunder-jee!_ speak for thyself and for thy
master."
"By the Lord Harry," shrieked the policeman, as the figure on the
pedestal rose slowly and salaamed, "it's old Mool Raj himself!"
"My lord!" faltered Hunuman, "this is irrelevant--this is contempt of
court."
"Peace! oh Hunuman! and respect the voice of thy parent," began the
blue monkey.
Then a roar of inextinguishable laughter played the mischief with
majesty.
Half an hour afterwards, when Chand Kor in tears was washing the blue
distemper off her lord and master's shrivelled limbs, he repeated his
injunction regarding the fifth commandment to his son, who sat
haranguing on liberty, freedom, public spirit, equality, fraternity,
and a host of other duties and privileges.
"They are good, my son," he said, "but money is good also, and peace
best of all. Ask no more. I am content, and thou hast naught to do
with it. The temple is, and the blue monkey was mine--at least I was
the blue monkey."
Then Hunuman Sing swore.
That evening the deputy commissioner held a friendly inquiry, and
everybody shook hands all round, excepting Hunuman Sing and his
friend, who left by _ekka_ before the proceedings commenced, vowing
vengeance on all summary justice. He was a full-blown pleader before
the famous case of "Mool Raj and a Conch _versus_ Azmutoollah Khan and
Others" came up before the chief court of appeal. On that occasion he
argued most eloquently on various subjects for half an hour, and was
about to resume his seat, covered with perspiration and honour, when a
voice from the body of the court cried:
"Respect thy parent, O Hunuman! Remember the things that are behind."
Coiled up neatly on his chair was a blue tail, and once more laughter
played the mischief with majesty.
Some people say that was why the appeal was dismissed. Anyhow, it is
certain that shortly afterwards Hunuman set up as a pleader in another
province.
So Jehadpore brought up its troopers, and paid or did not pay its
debts in peace. And when Mool Raj died, the folk wagged their heads,
saying, "Well, he was not much to speak of as a man, but he was a
first-rate monkey."
He had no name. The village folk, it is true, called him Baba; but so
they called all such as he. Nor did he ever show that he identified
the word as anything more personal than the rest of the strange sounds
to which he listened serenely as if he had no part or lot in them.
Perhaps he was deaf, perhaps he was dumb. Perhaps he was neither.
Nobody knew, nor for the matter of that cared. He was one of Shah
Sujah's mice; no more, no less. In that lay the difference between him
and other men. A small difference in some ways; in others illimitable.
To the level of the brows he was as fine a young fellow as you could
meet; of middle height, with clean, straight limbs. Above that
nothing--nothing but a skull narrowed to the contours of a new-born
babe's, conical, repulsive, like a rat's. Whence the name Shah Sujah's
mouse.
The learned among us call such poor creatures microcephalous, and talk
glibly of joined sutures and osseous formation. The natives of upper
India have a different theory. These mouselike ones belong to Shah
Sujah's shrine, because they are the firstlings of barren women made
fruitful by the saints' intercession. Therefore, from their birth they
bear the token of the mother's vow, dedicating them to his service.
The seal is set on them from the beginning in mute witness to the
truth.
Whatever that truth may be; whether, as some say, the new-born babes
brought to be reared, like Samuel in the temple, are born as other