LIVES OF THE POETS: GAY, THOMSON, YOUNG, and OTHERS
By Samuel Johnson
Contents.
Introduction by Henry Morley.
William King.
Charles Montague, Earl of Halifax.
Dr. Thomas Parnell.
Samuel Garth.
Nicholas Rowe.
John Gay.
Thomas Tickell.
James Thomson.
Dr. Isaac Watts.
Ambrose Philips.
Gilbert West.
William Collins.
John Dyer.
William Shenstone.
Edward Young.
David Mallet.
Mark Akenside.
Thomas Gray.
George Lyttelton.
This volume contains a record of twenty lives, of which only one--that
of Edward Young--is treated at length. It completes our edition of
Johnson's Lives of the Poets, from which a few only of the briefest and
least important have been omitted.
The eldest of the Poets here discussed were Samuel Garth, Charles
Montague (Lord Halifax), and William King, who were born within the
years 1660-63. Next in age were Addison's friend Ambrose Philips,
and Nicholas Rowe the dramatist, who was also the first editor of
Shakespeare's plays after the four folios had appeared. Ambrose Philips
and Rowe were born in 1671 and 1673, and Isaac Watts in 1674. Thomas
Parnell, born in 1679, would follow next, nearly of like age with Young,
whose birth-year was 1681. Pope's friend John Gay was of Pope's age,
born in 1688, two years later than Addison's friend Thomas Tickell, who
was born in 1686. Next in the course of years came, in 1692, William
Somerville, the author of "The Chace." John Dyer, who wrote "Grongar
Hill," and James Thomson, who wrote the "Seasons," were both born in the
year 1700. They were two of three poets--Allan Ramsay, the third--who,
almost at the same time, wrote verse instinct with a fresh sense of
outward Nature which was hardly to be found in other writers of
that day. David Mallet, Thomson's college-friend and friend of
after-years--who shares with Thomson the curiosity of critics who would
decide which of them wrote "Rule Britannia"--was of Thomson's age.
The other writers of whose lives Johnson here gives his note were men
born in the beginning of the eighteenth century: Gilbert West, the
translator of Pindar, in 1706; George Lyttelton, in 1709. William
Shenstone, whose sense of Nature, although true, was mixed with the
conventions of his time, and who once asked a noble friend to open a
waterfall in the garden upon which the poet spent his little patrimony,
was born in 1714; Thomas Gray, in 1716; William Collins, in 1720; and
Mark Akenside, in 1721. In Collins, while he lived with loss of reason,
Johnson, who had fears for himself, took pathetic interest. Akenside
could not interest him much. Akenside made his mark when young with "The
Pleasures of Imagination," a good poem, according to the fashion of the
time, when read with due consideration as a young man's first venture
for fame. He spent much of the rest of his life in overloading it with
valueless additions. The writer who begins well should let well alone,
and, instead of tinkering at bygone work, follow the course of his own
ripening thought. He should seek new ways of doing worthy service in the
years of labour left to him.
William King was born in London in 1663; the son of Ezekiel King, a
gentleman. He was allied to the family of Clarendon.
From Westminster School, where he was a scholar on the foundation under
the care of Dr. Busby, he was at eighteen elected to Christ Church
in 1681; where he is said to have prosecuted his studies with so much
intenseness and activity, that before he was eight years' standing he
had read over, and made remarks upon, twenty-two thousand odd hundred
books and manuscripts. The books were certainly not very long, the
manuscripts not very difficult, nor the remarks very large; for the
calculator will find that he despatched seven a day for every day of
his eight years; with a remnant that more than satisfies most other
students. He took his degree in the most expensive manner, as a GRAND
COMPOUNDER; whence it is inferred that he inherited a considerable
fortune.
In 1688, the same year in which he was made Master of Arts, he published
a confutation of Varillas's account of Wickliffe; and, engaging in the
study of the civil law, became Doctor in 1692, and was admitted advocate
at Doctors' Commons.
He had already made some translations from the French, and written some
humorous and satirical pieces; when, in 1694, Molesworth published his
"Account of Denmark," in which he treats the Danes and their monarch
with great contempt; and takes the opportunity of insinuating those wild
principles by which he supposes liberty to be established, and by
which his adversaries suspect that all subordination and government is
endangered.
This book offended Prince George; and the Danish Minister presented a
memorial against it. The principles of its author did not please Dr.
King; and therefore he undertook to confute part, and laugh at the rest.
The controversy is now forgotten: and books of this kind seldom live
long when interest and resentment have ceased.
In 1697 he mingled in the controversy between Boyle and Bentley; and was
one of those who tried what wit could perform in opposition to learning,
on a question which learning only could decide.
In 1699 was published by him "A Journey to London," after the method of
Dr. Martin Lister, who had published "A Journey to Paris." And in
president--in two dialogues, intituled "The Transactioner."
Though he was a regular advocate in the courts of civil and canon law,
he did not love his profession, nor, indeed, any kind of business which
interrupted his voluptuary dreams or forced him to rouse from that
indulgence in which only he could find delight. His reputation as a
civilian was yet maintained by his judgments in the Courts of Delegates,
and raised very high by the address and knowledge which he discovered in
Duchess of Buckinghamshire, who sued for a divorce and obtained it.
The expense of his pleasures, and neglect of business, had now lessened
his revenues; and he was willing to accept of a settlement in Ireland,
where, about 1702, he was made Judge of the Admiralty, Commissioner
of the Prizes, Keeper of the Records in Birmingham's Tower, and
Vicar-General to Dr. Marsh, the primate.
But it is vain to put wealth within the reach of him who will not
stretch out his hand to take it. King soon found a friend, as idle and
thoughtless as himself, in Upton, one of the judges, who had a pleasant
house called Mountown, near Dublin, to which King frequently retired;
delighting to neglect his interest, forget his cares, and desert his
duty.
Here he wrote "Mully of Mountown," a poem; by which, though
fanciful readers in the pride of sagacity have given it a poetical
interpretation, was meant originally no more than it expressed, as it
was dictated only by the author's delight in the quiet of Mountown.
In 1708, when Lord Wharton was sent to govern Ireland, King returned to
London, with his poverty, his idleness, and his wit; and published
some essays, called "Useful Transactions." His "Voyage to the Island of
Cajamai" is particularly commended. He then wrote the "Art of Love," a
poem remarkable, notwithstanding its title, for purity of sentiment; and
in 1709 imitated Horace in an "Art of Cookery," which he published with
some letters to Dr. Lister.
In 1710 he appeared as a lover of the Church, on the side of
Sacheverell; and was supposed to have concurred at least in the
projection of the Examiner. His eyes were open to all the operations of
Whiggism; and he bestowed some strictures upon Dr. Kennet's adulatory
sermon at the funeral of the Duke of Devonshire.
"The History of the Heathen Gods," a book composed for schools, was
written by him in 1711. The work is useful, but might have been produced
without the powers of King. The same year he published "Rufinus," an
historical essay; and a poem intended to dispose the nation to think as
he thought of the Duke of Marlborough and his adherents.
In 1711, competence, if not plenty, was again put into his power.
He was, without the trouble of attendance or the mortification of a
request, made Gazetteer. Swift, Freind, Prior, and other men of the same
party, brought him the key of the Gazetteer's office. He was now again
placed in a profitable employment, and again threw the benefit away.
An Act of Insolvency made his business at that time particularly
troublesome; and he would not wait till hurry should be at an end,
but impatiently resigned it, and returned to his wonted indigence and
amusements.
One of his amusements at Lambeth, where he resided, was to mortify
Dr. Tenison, the archbishop, by a public festivity on the surrender of
Dunkirk to Hill; an event with which Tenison's political bigotry did
not suffer him to be delighted. King was resolved to counteract his
sullenness, and at the expense of a few barrels of ale filled the
neighbourhood with honest merriment.
In the autumn of 1712 his health declined; he grew weaker by degrees,
and died on Christmas Day. Though his life had not been without
irregularity, his principles were pure and orthodox, and his death was
pious.
After this relation it will be naturally supposed that his poems
were rather the amusements of idleness than efforts of study; that he
endeavoured rather to divert than astonish; that his thoughts seldom
aspired to sublimity; and that, if his verse was easy and his images
familiar, he attained what he desired. His purpose is to be merry; but
perhaps, to enjoy his mirth, it may be sometimes necessary to think well
of his opinions.
The life of the Earl of Halifax was properly that of an artful and
active statesman, employed in balancing parties, contriving expedients,
and combating opposition, and exposed to the vicissitudes of advancement
and degradation; but in this collection poetical merit is the claim to
attention; and the account which is here to be expected may properly be
proportioned, not to his influence in the State, but to his rank among
the writers of verse.
Charles Montague was born April 16, 1661, at Horton, in
Northamptonshire, the son of Mr. George Montague, a younger son of
the Earl of Manchester. He was educated first in the country, and then
removed to Westminster, where, in 1677, he was chosen a King's Scholar,
and recommended himself to Busby by his felicity in extemporary
epigrams. He contracted a very intimate friendship with Mr. Stepney; and
in 1682, when Stepney was elected at Cambridge, the election of Montague
being not to proceed till the year following, he was afraid lest by
being placed at Oxford he might be separated from his companion, and
therefore solicited to be removed to Cambridge, without waiting for the
advantages of another year.
It seemed indeed time to wish for a removal, for he was already a
schoolboy of one-and-twenty.
His relation, Dr. Montague, was then Master of the college in which he
was placed a Fellow-Commoner, and took him under his particular care.
Here he commenced an acquaintance with the great Newton, which continued
through his life, and was at last attested by a legacy.
In 1685 his verses on the death of King Charles made such an impression
on the Earl of Dorset that he was invited to town, and introduced by
that universal patron to the other wits. In 1687 he joined with Prior
in "The City Mouse and the Country Mouse," a burlesque of Dryden's "Hind
and Panther." He signed the invitation to the Prince of Orange, and sat
in the Convention. He about the same time married the Countess Dowager
of Manchester, and intended to have taken Orders; but, afterwards
altering his purpose, he purchased for 1,500 pounds the place of one of
the clerks of the Council.
After he had written his epistle on the victory of the Boyne, his patron
Dorset introduced him to King William with this expression, "Sir, I have
brought a MOUSE to wait on your Majesty." To which the King is said to
have replied, "You do well to put me in the way of making a MAN of him;"
and ordered him a pension of 500 pounds. This story, however current,
seems to have been made after the event. The King's answer implies a
greater acquaintance with our proverbial and familiar diction than King
William could possibly have attained.
In 1691, being member of the House of Commons, he argued warmly in
favour of a law to grant the assistance of counsel in trials for high
treason; and in the midst of his speech falling into some confusion, was
for a while silent; but, recovering himself, observed, "how reasonable
it was to allow counsel to men called as criminals before a court of
justice, when it appeared how much the presence of that assembly could
disconcert one of their own body."
After this he rose fast into honours and employments, being made one of
the Commissioners of the Treasury, and called to the Privy Council. In
in the great attempt of the recoinage, which was in two years happily
completed. In 1696 he projected the GENERAL FUND and raised the credit
of the Exchequer; and after inquiry concerning a grant of Irish Crown
lands, it was determined by a vote of the Commons that Charles Montague,
Esq., HAD DESERVED HIS MAJESTY'S FAVOUR. In 1698, being advanced to the
first Commission of the Treasury, he was appointed one of the regency in
the King's absence: the next year he was made Auditor of the Exchequer,
and the year after created Baron Halifax. He was, however, impeached by
the Commons; but the Articles were dismissed by the Lords.
At the accession of Queen Anne he was dismissed from the Council; and in
the first Parliament of her reign was again attacked by the Commons, and
again escaped by the protection of the Lords. In 1704 he wrote an answer
to Bromley's speech against occasional conformity. He headed the inquiry
into the danger of the Church. In 1706 he proposed and negotiated
the Union with Scotland; and when the Elector of Hanover received the
Garter, after the Act had passed for securing the Protestant Succession,
he was appointed to carry the ensigns of the Order to the Electoral
Court. He sat as one of the judges of Sacheverell, but voted for a mild
sentence. Being now no longer in favour, he contrived to obtain a writ
for summoning the Electoral Prince to Parliament as Duke of Cambridge.
At the Queen's death he was appointed one of the regents; and at the
accession of George I. was made Earl of Halifax, Knight of the Garter,
and First Commissioner of the Treasury, with a grant to his nephew of
the reversion of the Auditorship of the Exchequer. More was not to be
had, and this he kept but a little while; for on the 19th of May, 1715,
he died of an inflammation of his lungs.
Of him, who from a poet became a patron of poets, it will be readily
believed that the works would not miss of celebration. Addison began
to praise him early, and was followed or accompanied by other poets;
perhaps by almost all, except Swift and Pope, who forbore to flatter
him in his life, and after his death spoke of him--Swift with slight
censure, and Pope, in the character of Bufo, with acrimonious contempt.
He was, as Pope says, "fed with dedications;" for Tickell affirms that
no dedication was unrewarded. To charge all unmerited praise with the
guilt of flattery, and to suppose that the encomiast always knows and
feels the falsehoods of his assertions, is surely to discover great
ignorance of human nature and human life. In determinations depending
not on rules, but on experience and comparison, judgment is always in
some degree subject to affection. Very near to admiration is the wish to
admire.
Every man willingly gives value to the praise which he receives,
and considers the sentence passed in his favour as the sentence of
discernment. We admire in a friend that understanding that selected
us for confidence; we admire more, in a patron, that judgment which,
instead of scattering bounty indiscriminately, directed it to us; and,
if the patron be an author, those performances which gratitude forbids
us to blame, affection will easily dispose us to exalt.
To these prejudices, hardly culpable, interest adds a power always
operating, though not always, because not willingly, perceived. The
modesty of praise wears gradually away; and perhaps the pride of
patronage may be in time so increased that modest praise will no longer
please.
Many a blandishment was practised upon Halifax which he would never have
known had he no other attractions than those of his poetry, of which
a short time has withered the beauties. It would now be esteemed no
honour, by a contributor to the monthly bundles of verses, to be told
that, in strains either familiar or solemn, he sings like Montague.
The life of Dr. Parnell is a task which I should very willingly decline,
since it has been lately written by Goldsmith, a man of such variety of
powers, and such felicity of performance, that he always seemed to do
best that which he was doing; a man who had the art of being minute
without tediousness, and general without confusion; whose language was
copious without exuberance, exact without constraint, and easy without
weakness.
What such an author has told, who would tell again? I have made an
abstract from his larger narrative; and have this gratification from my
attempt, that it gives me an opportunity of paying due tribute to the
memory of Goldsmith.
Thomas Parnell was the son of a Commonwealthsman of the same name, who,
at the Restoration, left Congleton, in Cheshire, where the family
had been established for several centuries, and, settling in Ireland,
purchased an estate, which, with his lands in Cheshire, descended to the
poet, who was born at Dublin in 1679; and, after the usual education at
a grammar school, was, at the age of thirteen, admitted into the College
where, in 1700, he became Master of Arts; and was the same year ordained
a deacon, though under the canonical age, by a dispensation from the
Bishop of Derry.
About three years afterwards he was made a priest and in 1705 Dr. Ashe,
the Bishop of Clogher, conferred upon him the archdeaconry of Clogher.
About the same time he married Mrs. Anne Minchin, an amiable lady, by
whom he had two sons, who died young, and a daughter, who long survived
him.
At the ejection of the Whigs, in the end of Queen Anne's reign, Parnell
was persuaded to change his party, not without much censure from those
whom he forsook, and was received by the new Ministry as a valuable
reinforcement. When the Earl of Oxford was told that Dr. Parnell waited
among the crowd in the outer room, he went, by the persuasion of Swift,
with his Treasurer's staff in his hand, to inquire for him, and to bid
him welcome; and, as may be inferred from Pope's dedication, admitted
him as a favourite companion to his convivial hours, but, as it seems
often to have happened in those times to the favourites of the great,
without attention to his fortune, which, however, was in no great need
of improvement.
Parnell, who did not want ambition or vanity, was desirous to make
himself conspicuous, and to show how worthy he was of high preferment.
As he thought himself qualified to become a popular preacher, he
displayed his elocution with great success in the pulpits of London;
but the Queen's death putting an end to his expectations, abated his
diligence; and Pope represents him as falling from that time into
intemperance of wine. That in his latter life he was too much a lover of
the bottle, is not denied; but I have heard it imputed to a cause more
likely to obtain forgiveness from mankind, the untimely death of a
darling son; or, as others tell, the loss of his wife, who died (1712)
in the midst of his expectations.
He was now to derive every future addition to his preferments from
his personal interest with his private friends, and he was not long
unregarded. He was warmly recommended by Swift to Archbishop King,
who gave him a prebend in 1713; and in May, 1716, presented him to the
vicarage of Finglass, in the diocese of Dublin, worth 400 pounds a year.
Such notice from such a man inclines me to believe that the vice of
which he has been accused was not gross or not notorious.
But his prosperity did not last long. His end, whatever was its cause,
was now approaching. He enjoyed his preferment little more than a year;
for in July, 1717, in his thirty-eighth year, he died at Chester on his
way to Ireland.
He seems to have been one of those poets who take delight in writing. He
contributed to the papers of that time, and probably published more than
he owned. He left many compositions behind him, of which Pope selected
those which he thought best, and dedicated them to the Earl of Oxford.
Of these Goldsmith has given an opinion, and his criticism it is seldom
safe to contradict. He bestows just praise upon "The Rise of Woman,"
"The Fairy Tale," and "The Pervigilium Veneris;" but has very properly
remarked that in "The Battle of Mice and Frogs" the Greek names have
not in English their original effect. He tells us that "The Bookworm" is
borrowed from Beza; but he should have added with modern applications:
and when he discovers that "Gay Bacchus" is translated from Augurellus,
he ought to have remarked that the latter part is purely Parnell's.
Another poem, "When Spring Comes On," is, he says, taken from the
French. I would add that the description of "Barrenness," in his verses
to Pope, was borrowed from Secundus; but lately searching for the
passage which I had formerly read, I could not find it. "The Night Piece
on Death" is indirectly preferred by Goldsmith to Gray's "Churchyard;"
but, in my opinion, Gray has the advantage in dignity, variety, and
originality of sentiment. He observes that the story of "The Hermit" is
in More's "Dialogues" and Howell's "Letters," and supposes it to have
been originally Arabian.
Goldsmith has not taken any notice of "The Elegy to the Old Beauty,"
which is perhaps the meanest; nor of "The Allegory on Man," the happiest
of Parnell's performances. The hint of "The Hymn to Contentment" I
suspect to have been borrowed from Cleveland.
The general character of Parnell is not great extent of comprehension
or fertility of mind. Of the little that appears, still less is his own.
His praise must be derived from the easy sweetness of his diction: in
his verses there is more happiness than pains; he is sprightly without
effort, and always delights, though he never ravishes; everything is
proper, yet everything seems casual. If there is some appearance of
elaboration in "The Hermit," the narrative, as it is less airy, is less
pleasing. Of his other compositions it is impossible to say whether they
are the productions of nature, so excellent as not to want the help of
art, or of art so refined as to resemble nature.
This criticism relates only to the pieces published by Pope. Of the
large appendages which I find in the last edition, I can only say that
I know not whence they came, nor have ever inquired whither they are
going. They stand upon the faith of the compilers.
Samuel Garth was of a good family in Yorkshire, and from some school in
his own county became a student at Peter House, in Cambridge, where he
resided till he became Doctor of Physic on July the 7th, 1691. He was
examined before the College at London on March the 12th, 1691-2, and
admitted Fellow June 26th, 1693. He was soon so much distinguished
by his conversation and accomplishments as to obtain very extensive
practice; and, if a pamphlet of those times may be credited, had the
favour and confidence of one party, as Radcliffe had of the other. He is
always mentioned as a man of benevolence; and it is just to suppose that
his desire of helping the helpless disposed him to so much zeal for "The
Dispensary;" an undertaking of which some account, however short, is
proper to be given.
Whether what Temple says be true, that physicians have had more learning
than the other faculties, I will not stay to inquire; but I believe
every man has found in physicians great liberality and dignity of
sentiment, very prompt effusion of beneficence, and willingness to
exert a lucrative art where there is no hope of lucre. Agreeably to this
character, the College of Physicians, in July, 1687, published an
edict, requiring all the Fellows, Candidates, and Licentiates to give
gratuitous advice to the neighbouring poor. This edict was sent to the
Court of Aldermen; and, a question being made to whom the appellation
of the POOR should be extended, the College answered that it should be
sufficient to bring a testimonial from the clergyman officiating in the
parish where the patient resided.
After a year's experience the physicians found their charity frustrated
by some malignant opposition, and made to a great degree vain by the
high price of physic; they therefore voted, in August, 1688, that the
laboratory of the College should be accommodated to the preparation of
medicines, and another room prepared for their reception; and that the
contributors to the expense should manage the charity.
It was now expected that the apothecaries would have undertaken the care
of providing medicines; but they took another course. Thinking the whole
design pernicious to their interest, they endeavoured to raise a faction
against it in the College, and found some physicians mean enough
to solicit their patronage by betraying to them the counsels of the
College. The greater part, however, enforced by a new edict, in 1694,
the former order of 1687, and sent it to the Mayor and Aldermen, who
appointed a committee to treat with the College and settle the mode of
administering the charity.
It was desired by the aldermen that the testimonials of churchwardens
and overseers should be admitted; and that all hired servants, and
all apprentices to handicraftsmen, should be considered as POOR. This
likewise was granted by the College.
It was then considered who should distribute the medicines, and who
should settle their prices. The physicians procured some apothecaries to
undertake the dispensation, and offered that the warden and company of
the apothecaries should adjust the price. This offer was rejected; and
the apothecaries who had engaged to assist the charity were considered
as traitors to the company, threatened with the imposition of
troublesome offices, and deterred from the performance of their
engagements. The apothecaries ventured upon public opposition, and
presented a kind of remonstrance against the design to the committee of
the City, which the physicians condescended to confute: and at last the
traders seem to have prevailed among the sons of trade; for the proposal
of the College having been considered, a paper of approbation was drawn
up, but postponed and forgotten.
The physicians still persisted; and in 1696 a subscription was raised by
themselves according to an agreement prefixed to "The Dispensary." The
poor were, for a time, supplied with medicines; for how long a time I
know not. The medicinal charity, like others, began with ardour, but
soon remitted, and at last died gradually away.
About the time of the subscription begins the action of "The
Dispensary." The poem, as its subject was present and popular,
co-operated with passions and prejudices then prevalent, and, with
such auxiliaries to its intrinsic merit, was universally and liberally
applauded. It was on the side of charity against the intrigues of
interest; and of regular learning against licentious usurpation of
medical authority, and was therefore naturally favoured by those who
read and can judge of poetry.
In 1697 Garth spoke that which is now called "The Harveian Oration;"
which the authors of "The Biographia" mention with more praise than the
passage quoted in their notes will fully justify. Garth, speaking of
the mischiefs done by quacks, has these expressions: "Non tamen telis
vulnerat ista agyrtarum colluvies, sed theriaca quadam magis perniciosa,
non pyrio, sed pulvere nescio quo exotico certat, non globulis plumbeis,
sed pilulis aeque lethalibus interficit." This was certainly thought
fine by the author, and is still admired by his biographer. In October,
Garth, being an active and zealous Whig, was a member of the Kit-Cat
Club, and, by consequence, familiarly known to all the great men of that
denomination. In 1710, when the government fell into other hands, he
writ to Lord Godolphin, on his dismission, a short poem, which was
criticised in the Examiner, and so successfully either defended or
excused by Mr. Addison that, for the sake of the vindication, it ought
to be preserved.
At the accession of the present family his merits were acknowledged and
rewarded. He was knighted with the sword of his hero, Marlborough; and
was made Physician-in-Ordinary to the King, and Physician-General to the
army. He then undertook an edition of Ovid's "Metamorphoses," translated
by several hands; which he recommended by a preface, written with more
ostentation than ability; his notions are half-formed, and his materials
immethodically confused. This was his last work. He died January 18th,
His personal character seems to have been social and liberal. He
communicated himself through a very wide extent of acquaintance; and
though firm in a party, at a time when firmness included virulence, yet
he imparted his kindness to those who were not supposed to favour his
principles. He was an early encourager of Pope, and was at once the
friend of Addison and of Granville. He is accused of voluptuousness and
irreligion; and Pope, who says that "if ever there was a good Christian,
without knowing himself to be so, it was Dr. Garth," seems not able to
deny what he is angry to hear and loth to confess.
Pope afterwards declared himself convinced that Garth died in the
communion of the Church of Rome, having been privately reconciled. It
is observed by Lowth that there is less distance than is thought between
scepticism and Popery; and that a mind wearied with perpetual doubt,
willingly seeks repose in the bosom of an infallible Church.
His poetry has been praised at least equally to its merit. In "The
Dispensary" there is a strain of smooth and free versification; but few
lines are eminently elegant. No passages fall below mediocrity, and few
rise much above it. The plan seems formed without just proportion to the
subject; the means and end have no necessary connection. Resnel, in his
preface to Pope's Essay, remarks that Garth exhibits no discrimination
of characters; and that what any one says might, with equal propriety,
have been said by another. The general design is, perhaps, open to
criticism; but the composition can seldom be charged with inaccuracy
or negligence. The author never slumbers in self-indulgence; his full
vigour is always exerted; scarcely a line is left unfinished; nor is it
easy to find an expression used by constraint, or a thought imperfectly
expressed. It was remarked by Pope, that "The Dispensary" had been
corrected in every edition, and that every change was an improvement. It
appears, however, to want something of poetical ardour, and something
of general delectation; and therefore, since it has been no longer
supported by accidental and intrinsic popularity, it has been scarcely
able to support itself.
Nicholas Rowe was born at Little Beckford, in Bedfordshire, in 1673. His
family had long possessed a considerable estate, with a good house,
at Lambertoun in Devonshire. The ancestor from whom he descended in a
direct line received the arms borne by his descendants for his bravery
in the Holy War. His father, John Rowe, who was the first that quitted
his paternal acres to practise any part of profit, professed the law,
and published Benlow's and Dallison's Reports in the reign of James the
Second, when, in opposition to the notions then diligently propagated
of dispensing power, he ventured to remark how low his authors rated
the prerogative. He was made a serjeant, and died April 30, 1692. He was
buried in the Temple church.
Nicholas was first sent to a private school at Highgate; and, being
afterwards removed to Westminster, was at twelve years chosen one of the
King's Scholars. His master was Busby, who suffered none of his scholars
to let their powers lie useless; and his exercises in several languages
are said to have been written with uncommon degrees of excellence,
and yet to have cost him very little labour. At sixteen he had, in his
father's opinion, made advances in learning sufficient to qualify him
for the study of law, and was entered a student of the Middle Temple,
where for some time he read statutes and reports with proficiency
proportionate to the force of his mind, which was already such that
he endeavoured to comprehend law, not as a series of precedents, or
collection of positive precepts, but as a system of rational government
and impartial justice. When he was nineteen, he was, by the death of
his father, left more to his own direction, and probably from that time
suffered law gradually to give way to poetry. At twenty-five he produced
the Ambitious Step-Mother, which was received with so much favour that
he devoted himself from that time wholly to elegant literature.
His next tragedy (1702) was Tamerlane, in which, under the name of
Tamerlane, he intended to characterise King William, and Louis the
Fourteenth under Bajazet. The virtues of Tamerlane seem to have been
arbitrarily assigned him by his poet, for I know not that history gives
any other qualities than those which make a conqueror. The fashion,
however, of the time was to accumulate upon Louis all that can raise
horror and detestation; and whatever good was withheld from him, that
it might not be thrown away was bestowed upon King William. This was the
tragedy which Rowe valued most, and that which probably, by the help of
political auxiliaries, excited most applause; but occasional poetry must
often content itself with occasional praise. Tamerlane has for a long
time been acted only once a year, on the night when King William landed.
Our quarrel with Louis has been long over; and it now gratifies neither
zeal nor malice to see him painted with aggravated features, like a
Saracen upon a sign.
The Fair Penitent, his next production (1703), is one of the most
pleasing tragedies on the stage, where it still keeps its turns of
appearing, and probably will long keep them, for there is scarcely any
work of any poet at once so interesting by the fable, and so delightful
by the language. The story is domestic, and therefore easily received
by the imagination, and assimilated to common life; the diction is
exquisitely harmonious, and soft or sprightly as occasion requires.
The character of Lothario seems to have been expanded by Richardson into
Lovelace; but he has excelled his original in the moral effect of the
fiction. Lothario, with gaiety which cannot be hated, and bravery which
cannot be despised, retains too much of the spectator's kindness. It
was in the power of Richardson alone to teach us at once esteem and
detestation, to make virtuous resentment overpower all the benevolence
which wit, elegance, and courage, naturally excite; and to lose at last
the hero in the villain. The fifth act is not equal to the former; the
events of the drama are exhausted, and little remains but to talk of
what is past. It has been observed that the title of the play does not
sufficiently correspond with the behaviour of Calista, who at last
shows no evident signs of repentance, but may be reasonably suspected of
feeling pain from detection rather than from guilt, and expresses more
shame than sorrow, and more rage than shame.
His next (1706) was Ulysses; which, with the common fate of mythological
stories, is now generally neglected. We have been too early acquainted
with the poetical heroes to expect any pleasure from their revival; to
show them as they have already been shown, is to disgust by repetition;
to give them new qualities, or new adventures, is to offend by violating
received notions.
"The Royal Convert" (1708) seems to have a better claim to longevity.
The fable is drawn from an obscure and barbarous age, to which fictions
are more easily and properly adapted; for when objects are imperfectly
seen, they easily take forms from imagination. The scene lies among
our ancestors in our own country, and therefore very easily catches
attention. Rodogune is a personage truly tragical, of high spirit, and
violent passions, great with tempestuous dignity, and wicked with a soul
that would have been heroic if it had been virtuous. The motto seems to
tell that this play was not successful.
Rowe does not always remember what his characters require. In Tamerlane
there is some ridiculous mention of the God of Love; and Rodogune, a
savage Saxon, talks of Venus and the eagle that bears the thunder of
Jupiter.
This play discovers its own date, by a prediction of the Union, in
imitation of Cranmer's prophetic promises to Henry VIII. The anticipated
blessings of union are not very naturally introduced, nor very happily
expressed. He once (1706) tried to change his hand. He ventured on a
comedy, and produced the Biter, with which, though it was unfavourably
treated by the audience, he was himself delighted; for he is said to
have sat in the house laughing with great vehemence, whenever he had, in
his own opinion, produced a jest. But finding that he and the public had
no sympathy of mirth, he tried at lighter scenes no more.
After the Royal Convert (1714) appeared Jane Shore, written, as its
author professes, IN IMITATION OF SHAKESPEARE'S STYLE. In what he
thought himself an imitator of Shakespeare it is not easy to conceive.
The numbers, the diction, the sentiments, and the conduct, everything
in which imitation can consist, are remote in the utmost degree from
the manner of Shakespeare, whose dramas it resembles only as it is an
English story, and as some of the persons have their names in history.
This play, consisting chiefly of domestic scenes and private distress,
lays hold upon the heart. The wife is forgiven because she repents, and
the husband is honoured because he forgives. This, therefore, is one of
those pieces which we still welcome on the stage.
His last tragedy (1715) was Lady Jane Grey. This subject had been
chosen by Mr. Smith, whose papers were put into Rowe's hands such as
he describes them in his preface. This play has likewise sunk into
oblivion. From this time he gave nothing more to the stage.
Being by a competent fortune exempted from any necessity of combating
his inclination, he never wrote in distress, and therefore does not
appear to have ever written in haste. His works were finished to his own
approbation, and bear few marks of negligence or hurry. It is remarkable
that his prologues and epilogues are all his own, though he sometimes
supplied others; he afforded help, but did not solicit it.
As his studies necessarily made him acquainted with Shakespeare, and
acquaintance produced veneration, he undertook (1709) an edition of his
works, from which he neither received much praise, nor seems to have
expected it; yet I believe those who compare it with former copies will
find that he has done more than he promised; and that, without the pomp
of notes or boasts of criticism, many passages are happily restored. He
prefixed a life of the author, such as tradition, then almost expiring,
could supply, and a preface, which cannot be said to discover much
profundity or penetration. He at least contributed to the popularity of
his author. He was willing enough to improve his fortune by other arts
than poetry. He was under-secretary for three years when the Duke of
Queensberry was Secretary of State, and afterwards applied to the Earl
of Oxford for some public employment. Oxford enjoined him to study
Spanish; and when, some time afterwards, he came again, and said that he
had mastered it, dismissed him with this congratulation, "Then, sir, I
envy you the pleasure of reading 'Don Quixote' in the original."
This story is sufficiently attested; but why Oxford, who desired to
be thought a favourer of literature, should thus insult a man of
acknowledged merit, or how Rowe, who was so keen a Whig that he did not
willingly converse with men of the opposite party, could ask preferment
from Oxford, it is not now possible to discover. Pope, who told the
story, did not say on what occasion the advice was given; and, though
he owned Rowe's disappointment, doubted whether any injury was intended
him, but thought it rather Lord Oxford's ODD WAY.
It is likely that he lived on discontented through the rest of Queen
Anne's reign; but the time came at last when he found kinder friends. At
the accession of King George he was made Poet-Laureate--I am afraid, by
the ejection of poor Nahum Tate, who (1716) died in the Mint, where he
was forced to seek shelter by extreme poverty. He was made likewise one
of the land-surveyors of the customs of the Port of London. The Prince
of Wales chose him Clerk of his Council; and the Lord Chancellor Parker,
as soon as he received the seals, appointed him, unasked, Secretary
of the Presentations. Such an accumulation of employments undoubtedly
produced a very considerable revenue.
Having already translated some parts of Lucan's "Pharsalia," which had
been published in the Miscellanies, and doubtless received many praises,
he undertook a version of the whole work, which he lived to finish,
but not to publish. It seems to have been printed under the care of
Dr. Welwood, who prefixed the author's life, in which is contained the
following character:--
"As to his person, it was graceful and well made; his face regular,
and of a manly beauty. As his soul was well lodged, so its rational and
animal faculties excelled in a high degree. He had a quick and fruitful
invention, a deep penetration, and a large compass of thought, with
singular dexterity and easiness in making his thoughts to be understood.
He was master of most parts of polite learning, especially the classical
authors, both Greek and Latin; understood the French, Italian, and
Spanish languages, and spoke the first fluently, and the other two
tolerably well. He had likewise read most of the Greek and Roman
histories in their original languages, and most that are wrote
in English, French, Italian, and Spanish. He had a good taste in
philosophy; and, having a firm impression of religion upon his mind, he
took great delight in divinity and ecclesiastical history, in both of
which he made great advances in the times he retired into the country,
which was frequent. He expressed on all occasions his full persuasion
of the truth of revealed religion; and, being a sincere member of the
Established Church himself, he pitied, but condemned not, those that
dissented from it. He abhorred the principles of persecuting men upon
the account of their opinions in religion; and, being strict in his
own, he took it not upon him to censure those of another persuasion.
His conversation was pleasant, witty, and learned, without the least
tincture of affectation or pedantry; and his inimitable manner of
diverting and enlivening the company made it impossible for any one to
be out of humour when he was in it. Envy and detraction seemed to be
entirely foreign to his constitution; and whatever provocations he
met with at any time, he passed them over without the least thought of
resentment or revenge. As Homer had a Zoilus, so Mr. Rowe had sometimes
his; for there were not wanting malevolent people, and pretenders to
poetry too, that would now and then bark at his best performances; but
he was so conscious of his own genius, and had so much good-nature, as
to forgive them, nor could he ever be tempted to return them an answer.
"The love of learning and poetry made him not the less fit for business,
and nobody applied himself closer to it when it required his attendance.
The late Duke of Queensberry, when he was Secretary of State, made him
his secretary for public affairs; and when that truly great man came
to know him well, he was never so pleased as when Mr. Rowe was in
his company. After the duke's death, all avenues were stopped to his
preferment; and during the rest of that reign he passed his time with
the Muses and his books, and sometimes the conversation of his friends.
When he had just got to be easy in his fortune, and was in a fair way to
make it better, death swept him away, and in him deprived the world of
one of the best men, as well as one of the best geniuses, of the age.
He died like a Christian and a philosopher, in charity with all mankind,
and with an absolute resignation to the will of God. He kept up his
good-humour to the last; and took leave of his wife and friends,
immediately before his last agony, with the same tranquillity of mind,
and the same indifference for life, as though he had been upon taking
but a short journey. He was twice married--first to a daughter of
Mr. Parsons, one of the auditors of the revenue; and afterwards to a
daughter of Mr. Devenish, of a good family in Dorsetshire. By the first
he had a son; and by the second a daughter, married afterwards to Mr.
Fane. He died 6th December, 1718, in the forty-fifth year of his age,
and was buried on the 19th of the same month in Westminster Abbey, in
the aisle where many of our English poets are interred, over against
Chaucer, his body being attended by a select number of his friends, and
the dean and choir officiating at the funeral."
To this character, which is apparently given with the fondness of a
friend, may be added the testimony of Pope, who says, in a letter to
Blount, "Mr. Rowe accompanied me, and passed a week in the Forest. I
need not tell you how much a man of his turn entertained me; but I must
acquaint you, there is a vivacity and gaiety of disposition, almost
peculiar to him, which make it impossible to part from him without that
uneasiness which generally succeeds all our pleasure."
Pope has left behind him another mention of his companion less
advantageous, which is thus reported by Dr. Warburton:--
"Rowe, in Mr. Pope's opinion, maintained a decent character, but had no
heart. Mr. Addison was justly offended with some behaviour which arose
from that want, and estranged himself from him, which Rowe felt
very severely. Mr. Pope, their common friend, knowing this, took an
opportunity, at some juncture of Mr. Addison's advancement, to tell him
how poor Rowe was grieved at his displeasure, and what satisfaction he
expressed at Mr. Addison's good fortune, which he expressed so naturally
that he (Mr. Pope) could not but think him sincere. Mr. Addison replied,
'I do not suspect that he feigned; but the levity of his heart is such,
that he is struck with any new adventure, and it would affect him just
in the same manner if he heard I was going to be hanged.' Mr. Pope said
he could not deny but Mr. Addison understood Rowe well."
This censure time has not left us the power of confirming or refuting;
but observation daily shows that much stress is not to be laid on
hyperbolical accusations and pointed sentences, which even he that
utters them desires to be applauded rather than credited. Addison can
hardly be supposed to have meant all that he said. Few characters can
bear the microscopic scrutiny of wit quickened by anger; and, perhaps,
the best advice to authors would be, that they should keep out of the
way of one another.
Rowe is chiefly to be considered as a tragic writer and a translator. In
his attempt at comedy he failed so ignominiously that his Biter is not
inserted in his works: and his occasional poems and short compositions
are rarely worthy either praise or censure, for they seem the casual
sports of a mind seeking rather to amuse its leisure than to exercise
its powers. In the construction of his dramas there is not much art; he
is not a nice observer of the unities. He extends time and varies places
as his convenience requires. To vary the place is not, in my opinion,
any violation of nature, if the change be made between the acts, for it
is no less easy for the spectator to suppose himself at Athens in the
second act, than at Thebes in the first; but to change the scene, as is
done by Rowe, in the middle of an act, is to add more acts to the
play, since an act is so much of the business as is transacted without
interruption. Rowe, by this licence, easily extricates himself from
difficulties; as in Jane Grey, when we have been terrified with all the
dreadful pomp of public execution; and are wondering how the heroine
or the poet will proceed, no sooner has Jane pronounced some prophetic
rhymes than--pass and be gone--the scene closes, and Pembroke and
Gardiner are turned out upon the stage.
I know not that there can be found in his plays any deep search into
nature, any accurate discriminations of kindred qualities, or nice
display of passion in its progress; all is general and undefined. Nor
does he much interest or affect the auditor, except in Jane Shore,
who is always seen and heard with pity. Alicia is a character of empty
noise, with no resemblance to real sorrow or to natural madness.
Whence, then, has Rowe his reputation? From the reasonableness and
propriety of some of his scenes, from the elegance of his diction, and
the suavity of his verse. He seldom moves either pity or terror, but
he often elevates the sentiments; he seldom pierces the breast, but
he always delights the ear, and often improves the understanding. His
translation of the "Golden Verses," and of the first book of Quillet's
poem, have nothing in them remarkable. The "Golden Verses" are tedious.
The version of Lucan is one of the greatest productions of English
poetry, for there is perhaps none that so completely exhibits the
genius and spirit of the original. Lucan is distinguished by a kind
of dictatorial or philosophic dignity, rather, as Quintilian observes,
declamatory than poetical; full of ambitious morality and pointed
sentences, comprised in vigorous and animated lines. This character Rowe
has very diligently and successfully preserved. His versification,
which is such as his contemporaries practised, without any attempt at
innovation or improvement, seldom wants either melody or force. His
author's sense is sometimes a little diluted by additional infusions,
and sometimes weakened by too much expansion. But such faults are to
be expected in all translations, from the constraint of measures and
dissimilitude of languages. The "Pharsalia" of Rowe deserves more notice
than it obtains, and as it is more read will be more esteemed.
John Gay, descended from an old family that had been long in possession
of the manor of Goldworthy, in Devonshire, was born in 1688, at or near
Barnstaple, where he was educated by Mr. Luck, who taught the school of
that town with good reputation, and, a little before he retired from it,
published a volume of Latin and English verses. Under such a master he
was likely to form a taste for poetry. Being born without prospect
of hereditary riches, he was sent to London in his youth, and placed
apprentice with a silk mercer. How long he continued behind the
counter, or with what degree of softness and dexterity he received and
accommodated the ladies, as he probably took no delight in telling
it, is not known. The report is that he was soon weary of either the
restraint or servility of his occupation, and easily persuaded his
master to discharge him.
The Duchess of Monmouth, remarkable for inflexible perseverance in her
demand to be treated as a princess, in 1712 took Gay into her service
as secretary: by quitting a shop for such service he might gain leisure,
but he certainly advanced little in the boast of independence. Of his
leisure he made so good use that he published next year a poem on "Rural
Sports," and inscribed it to Mr. Pope, who was then rising fast into
reputation. Pope was pleased with the honour, and when he became
acquainted with Gay, found such attractions in his manners and
conversation that he seems to have received him into his inmost
confidence; and a friendship was formed between them which lasted to
their separation by death, without any known abatement on either part.
Gay was the general favourite of the whole association of wits; but they
regarded him as a playfellow rather than a partner, and treated him with
more fondness than respect.
Next year he published "The Shepherd's Week," six English pastorals, in
which the images are drawn from real life, such as it appears among the
rustics in parts of England remote from London. Steele, in some papers
of the Guardian, had praised Ambrose Philips as the pastoral writer
that yielded only to Theocritus, Virgil, and Spenser. Pope, who had also
published pastorals, not pleased to be overlooked, drew up a comparison
of his own compositions with those of Philips, in which he covertly gave
himself the preference, while he seemed to disown it. Not content with
this, he is supposed to have incited Gay to write "The Shepherd's Week,"
to show that, if it be necessary to copy nature with minuteness, rural
life must be exhibited such as grossness and ignorance have made it.
So far the plan was reasonable; but the pastorals are introduced by a
Proeme, written with such imitation as they could attain of obsolete
language, and, by consequence, in a style that was never spoken nor
written in any language or in any place. But the effect of reality
and truth became conspicuous, even when the intention was to show them
grovelling and degraded. These pastorals became popular, and were read
with delight as just representations of rural manners and occupations by
those who had no interest in the rivalry of the poets, nor knowledge of
the critical dispute.
In 1713 he brought a comedy called The Wife of Bath upon the stage, but
it received no applause; he printed it, however, and seventeen years
after, having altered it and, as he thought, adapted it more to the
public taste, he offered it again to the town; but, though he was
flushed with the success of the Beggar's Opera, had the mortification to
see it again rejected.
In the last year of Queen Anne's life Gay was made secretary to the Earl
of Clarendon, Ambassador to the Court of Hanover. This was a station
that naturally gave him hopes of kindness from every party; but the
Queen's death put an end to her favours, and he had dedicated his
"Shepherd's Week" to Bolingbroke, which Swift considered as the crime
that obstructed all kindness from the House of Hanover. He did not,
however, omit to improve the right which his office had given him to the
notice of the Royal Family. On the arrival of the Princess of Wales he
wrote a poem, and obtained so much favour that both the Prince and the
Princess went to see his What D'ye Call It, a kind of mock tragedy,
in which the images were comic and the action grave; so that, as Pope
relates, Mr. Cromwell, who could not hear what was said, was at a loss
how to reconcile the laughter of the audience with the solemnity of the
scene.
Of this performance the value certainly is but little; but it was one
of the lucky trifles that give pleasure by novelty, and was so much
favoured by the audience that envy appeared against it in the form of
criticism; and Griffin, a player, in conjunction with Mr. Theobald, a
man afterwards more remarkable, produced a pamphlet called "The Key to
the What D'ye Call It," "which," says Gay, "calls me a blockhead, and
Mr. Pope a knave."
But fortune has always been inconstant. Not long afterwards (1717) he
endeavoured to entertain the town with Three Hours after Marriage, a
comedy written, as there is sufficient reason for believing, by the
joint assistance of Pope and Arbuthnot. One purpose of it was to bring
into contempt Dr. Woodward, the fossilist, a man not really or justly
contemptible. It had the fate which such outrages deserve. The scene
in which Woodward was directly and apparently ridiculed, by the
introduction of a mummy and a crocodile, disgusted the audience, and the
performance was driven off the stage with general condemnation.
Gay is represented as a man easily incited to hope, and deeply depressed
when his hopes were disappointed. This is not the character of a hero,
but it may naturally imply something more generally welcome, a soft and
civil companion. Whoever is apt to hope good from others is diligent
to please them; but he that believes his powers strong enough to force
their own way, commonly tries only to please himself. He had been simple
enough to imagine that those who laughed at the What D'ye Call It would
raise the fortune of its author, and, finding nothing done, sunk into
dejection. His friends endeavoured to divert him. The Earl of Burlington
sent him (1716) into Devonshire, the year after Mr. Pulteney took him
to Aix, and in the following year Lord Harcourt invited him to his seat,
where, during his visit, two rural lovers were killed with lightning, as
is particularly told in Pope's "Letters."
Being now generally known, he published (1720) his poems by
subscription, with such success that he raised a thousand pounds, and
called his friends to a consultation what use might be best made of
it. Lewis, the steward of Lord Oxford, advised him to intrust it to the
Funds, and live upon the interest; Arbuthnot bade him to intrust it
to Providence, and live upon the principal; Pope directed him, and was
seconded by Swift, to purchase an annuity.
Gay in that disastrous year had a present from young Craggs of some
South Sea Stock, and once supposed himself to be master of twenty
thousand pounds. His friends persuaded him to sell his share; but he
dreamed of dignity and splendour, and could not bear to obstruct his
own fortune. He was then importuned to sell as much as would purchase a
hundred a year for life, "which," says Penton, "will make you sure of
a clean shirt and a shoulder of mutton every day." This counsel was
rejected; the profit and principal were lost, and Gay sunk under the
calamity so low that his life became in danger. By the care of his
friends, among whom Pope appears to have shown particular tenderness,
his health was restored; and, returning to his studies, he wrote a
tragedy called The Captives, which he was invited to read before the
Princess of Wales. When the hour came, he saw the Princess and her
ladies all in expectation, and, advancing with reverence too great for
any other attention, stumbled at a stool, and, falling forwards, threw
down a weighty Japan screen. The Princess started, the ladies screamed,
and poor Gay, after all the disturbance, was still to read his play.
The fate of The Captives, which was acted at Drury Lane in 1723-4, I
know not; but he now thought himself in favour, and undertook (1726)
to write a volume of "Fables" for the improvement of the young Duke of
Cumberland. For this he is said to have been promised a reward, which he
had doubtless magnified with all the wild expectations of indigence and
vanity.
Next year the Prince and Princess became King and Queen, and Gay was
to be great and happy; but on the settlement of the household, he found
himself appointed gentleman usher to the Princess Louisa. By this offer
he thought himself insulted, and sent a message to the Queen that he
was too old for the place. There seem to have been many machinations
employed afterwards in his favour, and diligent court was paid to Mrs.
Howard, afterwards Countess of Suffolk, who was much beloved by the King
and Queen, to engage her interest for his promotion; but solicitation,
verses, and flatteries were thrown away; the lady heard them, and did
nothing. All the pain which he suffered from neglect, or, as he perhaps
termed it, the ingratitude of the Court, may be supposed to have been
driven away by the unexampled success of the Beggar's Opera. This play,
written in ridicule of the musical Italian drama, was first offered
to Cibber and his brethren at Drury Lane and rejected: it being then
carried to Rich, had the effect, as was ludicrously said, of making Gay
RICH and Rich GAY. Of this lucky piece, as the reader cannot but wish
to know the original and progress, I have inserted the relation which
Spence has given in Pope's words:--
"Dr. Swift had been observing once to Mr. Gay what an odd pretty sort of
a thing a Newgate Pastoral might make. Gay was inclined to try at such a
thing for some time; but afterwards thought it would be better to write
a comedy on the same plan. This was what gave rise to the Beggar's
Opera. He began on it, and when first he mentioned it to Swift, the
doctor did not much like the project. As he carried it on, he showed
what he wrote to both of us, and we now and then gave a correction, or a
word or two of advice; but it was wholly of his own writing. When it was
done, neither of us thought it would succeed. We showed it to Congreve,
who, after reading it over, said it would either take greatly or be
damned confoundedly. We were all, at the first night of it, in
great uncertainty of the event, till we were very much encouraged by
overhearing the Duke of Argyll, who sat in the next box to us, say,
'It will do--it must do! I see it in the eyes of them.' This was a good
while before the first act was over, and so gave us ease soon; for that
Duke (besides his own good taste) has a particular knack, as any one now
living, in discovering the taste of the public. He was quite right in
this, as usual; the good-nature of the audience appeared stronger and
stronger every act, and ended in a clamour of applause."
Its reception is thus recorded in the notes to the "Dunciad":--
"This piece was received with greater applause than was ever known.
Besides being acted in London sixty-three days without interruption,
and renewed the next season with equal applause, it spread into all the
great towns of England; was played in many places to the thirtieth and
fortieth time; at Bath and Bristol fifty, etc. It made its progress into
Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, where it was performed twenty-four days
successively. The ladies carried about with them the favourite songs of
it in fans, and houses were furnished with it in screens. The fame of
it was not confined to the author only. The person who acted Polly, till
then obscure, became all at once the favourite of the town; her pictures
were engraved and sold in great numbers; her life written, books of
letters and verses to her published, and pamphlets made even of her
sayings and jests. Furthermore, it drove out of England (for that
season) the Italian Opera, which had carried all before it for ten
years."
Of this performance, when it was printed, the reception was different,
according to the different opinions of its readers. Swift commended it
for the excellence of its morality, as a piece that "placed all kinds of
vice in the strongest and most odious light;" but others, and among them
Dr. Herring, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, censured it as giving
encouragement, not only to vice, but to crimes, by making a highwayman
the hero and dismissing him at last unpunished. It has been even said
that after the exhibition of the Beggar's Opera the gangs of robbers
were evidently multiplied.
Both these decisions are surely exaggerated. The play, like many others,
was plainly written only to divert, without any moral purpose, and is
therefore not likely to do good; nor can it be conceived, without more
speculation than life requires or admits, to be productive of much evil.
Highwaymen and housebreakers seldom frequent the playhouse, or mingle in
any elegant diversion; nor is it possible for any one to imagine that he
may rob with safety, because he sees Macheath reprieved upon the stage.
This objection, however, or some other rather political than moral,
obtained such prevalence that when Gay produced a second part under the
name of Polly, it was prohibited by the Lord Chamberlain; and he was
forced to recompense his repulse by a subscription, which is said to
have been so liberally bestowed that what he called oppression ended in
profit. The publication was so much favoured that though the first part
gained him four hundred pounds, near thrice as much was the profit
of the second. He received yet another recompense for this supposed
hardship, in the affectionate attention of the Duke and Duchess of
Queensberry, into whose house he was taken, and with whom he passed the
remaining part of his life. The Duke, considering his want of economy,
undertook the management of his money, and gave it to him as he wanted
it. But it is supposed that the discountenance of the Court sunk deep
into his heart, and gave him more discontent than the applauses or
tenderness of his friends could overpower. He soon fell into his old
distemper, an habitual colic, and languished, though with many intervals
of ease and cheerfulness, till a violent fit at last seized him and
carried him to the grave, as Arbuthnot reported, with more precipitance
than he had ever known. He died on the 4th of December, 1732, and was
buried in Westminster Abbey. The letter which brought an account of
his death to Swift, was laid by for some days unopened, because when he
received it, he was impressed with the preconception of some misfortune.
After his death was published a second volume of "Fables," more
political than the former. His opera of Achilles was acted, and the
profits were given to two widow sisters, who inherited what he left,
as his lawful heirs; for he died without a will, though he had gathered
three thousand pounds. There have appeared likewise under his name a
comedy called the Distressed Wife, and the Rehearsal at Gotham, a piece
of humour.
The character given him by Pope is this, that "he was a natural man,
without design, who spoke what he thought, and just as he thought it,"
and that "he was of a timid temper, and fearful of giving offence to the
great;" which caution, however, says Pope, was of no avail.
As a poet he cannot be rated very high. He was, I once heard a female
critic remark, "of a lower order." He had not in any great degree the
MENS DIVINIOR, the dignity of genius. Much, however, must be allowed
to the author of a new species of composition, though it be not of the
highest kind. We owe to Gay the ballad opera, a mode of comedy which at
first was supposed to delight only by its novelty, but has now, by the
experience of half a century, been found so well accommodated to
the disposition of a popular audience that it is likely to keep long
possession of the stage. Whether this new drama was the product of
judgment or of luck, the praise of it must be given to the inventor; and
there are many writers read with more reverence to whom such merit or
originality cannot be attributed.
His first performance, the Rural Sports, is such as was easily planned
and executed; it is never contemptible, nor ever excellent. The Fan is
one of those mythological fictions which antiquity delivers ready to the
hand, but which, like other things that lie open to every one's use,
are of little value. The attention naturally retires from a new tale of
Venus, Diana, and Minerva.
His "Fables" seem to have been a favourite work; for, having published
one volume, he left another behind him. Of this kind of Fables the
author does not appear to have formed any distinct or settled notion.
Phaedrus evidently confounds them with Tales, and Gay both with Tales
and Allegorical Prosopopoeias. A Fable or Apologue, such as is now under
consideration, seems to be, in its genuine state, a narrative in which
beings irrational, and sometimes inanimate, arbores loquuntur, non
tantum ferae, are, for the purpose of moral instruction, feigned to act
and speak with human interests and passions. To this description the
compositions of Gay do not always conform. For a fable he gives now and
then a tale, or an abstracted allegory; and from some, by whatever name
they may be called, it will be difficult to extract any moral principle.
They are, however, told with liveliness, the versification is smooth,
and the diction, though now and then a little constrained by the measure
or the rhyme, is generally happy.
To "Trivia" may be allowed all that it claims; it is sprightly, various,
and pleasant. The subject is of that kind which Gay was by nature
qualified to adorn, yet some of his decorations may be justly wished
away. An honest blacksmith might have done for Patty what is performed
by Vulcan. The appearance of Cloacina is nauseous and superfluous; a