+------------------------------------------------------------+
| Transcriber's Note:                                        |
|                                                            |
| Obvious typographical errors have been corrected in        |
| this text. For a complete list, please see the bottom of   |
| this document.                                             |
+------------------------------------------------------------+
Author of "_Challenge_," "_Including Horace_,"
"_Modern American Poetry_," etc.
For permission to reprint the material in this volume, the editor
wishes, first of all, to acknowledge his debt to those poets whose
co-operation has been of such assistance not only in finally
determining upon the choice of their poems, but in collecting dates,
biographical data, etc. Secondly, he wishes to thank the publishers,
specifically acknowledged to:
DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY and A. P. WATT & SON--
For "The Return" from _The Five Nations_ and for "An
Astrologer's Song" from _Rewards and Fairies_ by Rudyard
Kipling. Thanks also are due to Mr. Kipling himself for
personal permission to reprint these poems.
DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY and MARTIN SECKER--
For the poem from _Collected Poems_ by James Elroy Flecker.
For the poems from _The Old Huntsman_, _Counter-Attack_ and
_Picture Show_ by Siegfried Sassoon.
For poems from _War and Love_ by Richard Aldington and _The
Mountainy Singer_ by Seosamh MacCathmhaoil (Joseph
Campbell).
For poems from _Peacock Pie_ and _The Listeners_ by Walter
de la Mare and _Poems_ by Edward Thomas.
For two poems from _Poems, 1908-1919_, by John Drinkwater,
both of which are used by permission of, and by special
arrangement with, Houghton Mifflin Company, the authorized
publishers.
For the selections from _Chamber Music_ by James Joyce,
_Songs to Save a Soul_ and _Before Dawn_ by Irene
Rutherford McLeod, _Amores, Look! We Have Come Through!_,
and _New Poems_ by D. H. Lawrence.
For poems from _The Collected Poems of William H. Davies_,
_Fairies and Fusiliers_ by Robert Graves, _The Queen of
China and Other Poems_ by Edward Shanks, and _Poems: First
Series_ by J. C. Squire.
For the selections from _Poems_ by G. K. Chesterton,
_Ballads and Songs_ by John Davidson, _The Collected Poems
of Rupert Brooke_, _Admirals All_ by Henry Newbolt, _Herod_
and _Lyrics and Dramas_ by Stephen Phillips, _The Hope of
the World and Other Poems_ by William Watson, and _In Cap
and Bells_ by Owen Seaman.
For "Going and Staying" by Thomas Hardy and "The House That
Was" by Laurence Binyon.
For the selections from _Fires_ and _Borderlands and
Thoroughfares_ by Wilfrid Wilson Gibson, _Poems_ by Ralph
Hodgson, the sonnet from _Good Friday and Other Poems_ by
John Masefield, and the passage (entitled in this volume
"Rounding the Horn") from "Dauber" in _The Story of a
Round-House_ by John Masefield.
For the title poem from _In Flanders Fields_ by John McCrae.
THE POETRY BOOKSHOP (England)--
For two excerpts from _Strange Meetings_ by Harold Monro and
for the poems from the biennial anthologies, _Georgian
Poetry_.
For the quotations from _Poems_ by William Ernest Henley.
For the poem from _Ardours and Endurances_ by Robert
Nichols.
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., as the representatives of B. H.
BLACKWELL, of Oxford--
For a poem by Edith Sitwell from _The Mother_.
INTRODUCTORY                                         xi
FIONA MACLEOD (_William Sharp_) (1855-1905)
To An Athlete Dying Young                        38
"Loveliest of Trees"                             39
I Shall Not Die for Thee                         40
Epitaph                                          42
In the Mile End Road                             42
Sheep and Lambs                                  43
All-Souls                                        44
To An Old Fogey                                  45
Thomas of the Light Heart                        47
Drake's Drum                                     49
In the Wood of Finvara                           50
Modern Beauty                                    51
The Lake Isle of Innisfree                       53
The Song of the Old Mother                       53
The Cap and Bells                                54
An Old Song Resung                               55
Gunga Din                                        57
The Return                                       61
The Conundrum of the Workshops                   63
An Astrologer's Song                             66
A Ballad of London                               69
Regret                                           70
Mystic and Cavalier                              71
To a Traveller                                   73
To One in Bedlam                                 74
You Would Have Understood Me                     75
"A. E." (_George William Russell_) (1867-    )
The Great Breath                                 76
The Unknown God                                  77
Fragment from "Herod"                            78
Beautiful Lie the Dead                           78
A Dream                                          79
A Song                                           79
The House That Was                               80
The Green River                                  81
The Dying Swan                                   82
Silence Sings                                    82
Days Too Short                                   84
The Moon                                         85
The Villain                                      85
The Example                                      86
The South Country                                87
The Ballad of the _Billycock_                    90
A Rustic Song                                    92
Beg-Innish                                       95
A Translation from Petrarch                      96
To the Oaks of Glencree                          96
A Connaught Lament                               97
The Waves of Breffny                             98
Walls                                            99
A Broken Song                                    99
Beauty's a Flower                               100
In Flanders Fields                              101
Clair de Lune                                   102
There Shall Be More Joy                         104
The Listeners                                   106
An Epitaph                                      107
Tired Tim                                       108
Old Susan                                       108
Nod                                             109
Lepanto                                         111
A Prayer in Darkness                            118
The Donkey                                      119
Prelude                                         120
The Stone                                       121
Sight                                           124
A Consecration                                  126
Sea-Fever                                       127
Rounding the Horn                               128
The Choice                                      131
Sonnet                                          132
Songs from an Evil Wood                         133
If I Should Ever By Chance                      136
Tall Nettles                                    137
Fifty Faggots                                   137
Cock-Crow                                       138
Praise                                          139
Eve                                             140
Time, You Old Gipsy Man                         142
The Birdcatcher                                 144
The Mystery                                     144
The Nightingale Near the House                  145
Every Thing                                     146
Strange Meetings                                149
To My Daughter Betty, The Gift of God           150
Sherwood                                        151
The Barrel-Organ                                154
Epilogue                                        161
The Plougher                                    162
An Old Woman of the Roads                       164
JOSEPH CAMPBELL (_Seosamh MacCathmhaoil_) (1881-    )
I Am the Mountainy Singer                       165
The Old Woman                                   166
The Shell                                       167
What Tomas An Buile Said In a Pub               168
To the Four Courts, Please                      169
Reciprocity                                     170
A Town Window                                   170
I Hear an Army                                  171
A House                                         172
From "Vashti"                                   175
Song                                            176
The Old Ships                                   178
People                                          180
Piano                                           180
Stone Trees                                     181
Fleet Street                                    183
The Pater of the Cannon                         183
Preexistence                                    184
The Singer                                      186
Reality                                         186
Song                                            187
To Victory                                      189
Dreamers                                        190
The Rear-Guard                                  190
Thrushes                                        191
Aftermath                                       192
The Great Lover                                 195
Dust                                            198
The Soldier                                     200
Grandeur                                        201
The Spires of Oxford                            203
Lochanilaun                                     204
London                                          205
The Web of Eros                                 206
Interlude                                       207
The Bugler                                      208
Sportsmen in Paradise                           209
Romance                                         210
By-the-Way                                      211
Death and the Fairies                           212
An Evening in England                           213
Evening Clouds                                  214
"Is Love, then, so Simple"                      215
Lone Dog                                        215
Prelude                                         216
Images                                          217
At the British Museum                           218
Complaint                                       219
The Blind Pedlar                                220
Progress                                        221
Nearer                                          222
Two Sonnets                                     223
To Germany                                      225
It's a Queer Time                               226
A Pinch of Salt                                 227
I Wonder What It Feels Like to be Drowned?      228
The Last Post                                   229
_The New Influences and Tendencies_
Mere statistics are untrustworthy; dates are even less dependable.
But, to avoid hairsplitting, what we call "modern" English literature
may be said to date from about 1885. A few writers who are decidedly
"of the period" are, as a matter of strict chronology, somewhat
earlier. But the chief tendencies may be divided into seven periods.
They are (1) The decay of Victorianism and the growth of a purely
decorative art, (2) The rise and decline of the AEsthetic Philosophy,
(3) The muscular influence of Henley, (4) The Celtic revival in
Ireland, (5) Rudyard Kipling and the ascendency of mechanism in art,
(6) John Masefield and the return of the rhymed narrative, (7) The war
and the appearance of "The Georgians." It may be interesting to trace
these developments in somewhat greater detail.
The age commonly called Victorian came to an end about 1885. It was an
age distinguished by many true idealists and many false ideals. It
was, in spite of its notable artists, on an entirely different level
from the epoch which had preceded it. Its poetry was, in the main, not
universal but parochial; its romanticism was gilt and tinsel; its
realism was as cheap as its showy glass pendants, red plush, parlor
chromos and antimacassars. The period was full of a pessimistic
resignation (the note popularized by Fitzgerald's Omar Khayyam) and a
kind of cowardice or at least a negation which, refusing to see any
glamour in the actual world, turned to the Middle Ages, King Arthur,
the legend of Troy--to the suave surroundings of a dream-world instead
of the hard contours of actual experience.
At its worst, it was a period of smugness, of placid and pious
sentimentality--epitomized by the rhymed sermons of Martin Farquhar
Tupper, whose _Proverbial Philosophy_ was devoured with all its
cloying and indigestible sweetmeats by thousands. The same tendency is
apparent, though far less objectionably, in the moralizing lays of
Lord Thomas Macaulay, in the theatrically emotionalized verses of
Robert Buchanan, Edwin Arnold and Sir Lewis Morris--even in the lesser
later work of Alfred Tennyson.
And, without Tupper's emptiness or absurdities, the outworn platitudes
again find their constant lover in Alfred Austin, Tennyson's successor
as poet laureate. Austin brought the laureateship, which had been held
by poets like Ben Jonson, Dryden, Southey and Wordsworth, to an
incredibly low level; he took the thinning stream of garrulous poetic
conventionality, reduced it to the merest trickle--and diluted it.
The poets of a generation before this time were fired with such ideas
as freedom, a deep and burning awe of nature, an insatiable hunger for
truth in all its forms and manifestations. The characteristic poets of
the Victorian Era, says Max Plowman, "wrote under the dominance of
churchliness, of 'sweetness and light,' and a thousand lesser theories
that have not truth but comfort for their end."
The revolt against this and the tawdriness of the period had already
begun; the best of Victorianism can be found not in men who were
typically Victorian, but in pioneers like Browning and writers like
Swinburne, Rossetti, William Morris, who were completely out of
sympathy with their time.
But it was Oscar Wilde who led the men of the now famous 'nineties
toward an aesthetic freedom, to champion a beauty whose existence was
its "own excuse for being." Wilde's was, in the most outspoken manner,
the first use of aestheticism as a slogan; the battle-cry of the group
was actually the now outworn but then revolutionary "Art for Art's
sake"! And, so sick were people of the shoddy ornaments and drab
ugliness of the immediate past, that the slogan won. At least,
temporarily.
_The Yellow Book_, the organ of a group of young writers and artists,
appeared (1894-97), representing a reasoned and intellectual reaction,
mainly suggested and influenced by the French. The group of
contributors was a peculiarly mixed one with only one thing in common.
And that was a conscious effort to repudiate the sugary airs and prim
romantics of the Victorian Era.
Almost the first act of the "new" men was to rouse and outrage their
immediate predecessors. This end-of-the-century desire to shock,
which was so strong and natural an impulse, still has a place of its
own--especially as an antidote, a harsh corrective. Mid-Victorian
propriety and self-satisfaction crumbled under the swift and energetic
audacities of the sensational younger authors and artists; the old
walls fell; the public, once so apathetic to _belles lettres_, was
more than attentive to every phase of literary experimentation. The
last decade of the nineteenth century was so tolerant of novelty in
art and ideas, that it would seem, says Holbrook Jackson in his
penetrative summary, _The Eighteen-Nineties_, "as though the declining
century wished to make amends for several decades of artistic
monotony. It may indeed be something more than a coincidence that
placed this decade at the close of a century, and _fin de siecle_ may
have been at once a swan song and a death-bed repentance."
But later on, the movement (if such it may be called), surfeited with
its own excesses, fell into the mere poses of revolt; it degenerated
into a half-hearted defense of artificialities.
It scarcely needed W. S. Gilbert (in _Patience_) or Robert Hichens (in
_The Green Carnation_) to satirize its distorted attitudinizing. It
strained itself to death; it became its own burlesque of the bizarre,
an extravaganza of extravagance. "The period" (I am again quoting
Holbrook Jackson) "was as certainly a period of decadence as it was a
period of renaissance. The decadence was to be seen in a perverse and
finicking glorification of the fine arts and mere artistic virtuosity
on the one hand, and a militant commercial movement on the other....
The eroticism which became so prevalent in the verse of many of the
younger poets was minor because it was little more than a pose--not
because it was erotic.... It was a passing mood which gave the poetry
of the hour a hothouse fragrance; a perfume faint yet unmistakable and
strange."
But most of the elegant and disillusioned young men overshot their
mark. Mere health reasserted itself; an inherent repressed vitality
sought new channels. Arthur Symons deserted his hectic Muse, Richard
Le Gallienne abandoned his preciosity, and the group began to
disintegrate. The aesthetic philosophy was wearing thin; it had already
begun to fray and reveal its essential shabbiness. Wilde himself
possessed the three things which he said the English would never
forgive--youth, power and enthusiasm. But in trying to make an
exclusive cult of beauty, Wilde had also tried to make it evade
actuality; he urged that art should not, in any sense, be a part of
life but an escape from it. "The proper school to learn art in is not
Life--but Art." And in the same essay ("The Decay of Lying") he wrote,
"All bad Art comes from returning to Life and Nature, and elevating
them into ideals." Elsewhere he said, "The first duty in life is to be
as artificial as possible. What the second duty is no one has
discovered."
Such a cynical and decadent philosophy could not go unchallenged. Its
aristocratic blue-bloodedness was bound to arouse the red blood of
common reality. This negative attitude received its answer in the work
of that yea-sayer, W. E. Henley.
Henley repudiated this languid aestheticism; he scorned a negative art
which was out of touch with the world. His was a large and sweeping
affirmation. He felt that mere existence was glorious; life was
coarse, difficult, often dangerous and dirty, but splendid at the
heart. Art, he knew, could not be separated from the dreams and
hungers of man; it could not flourish only on its own essences or
technical accomplishments. To live, poetry would have to share the
fears, angers, hopes and struggles of the prosaic world. And so Henley
came like a swift salt breeze blowing through a perfumed and
heavily-screened studio. He sang loudly (sometimes even too loudly) of
the joy of living and the courage of the "unconquerable soul." He was
a powerful influence not only as a poet but as a critic and editor. In
the latter capacity he gathered about him such men as Robert Louis
Stevenson, Rudyard Kipling, Thomas Hardy, H. G. Wells, W. B. Yeats, T.
E. Brown, J. M. Barrie. None of these men were his disciples, but none
of them came into contact with him without being influenced in some
way by his sharp and positive personality. A pioneer and something of
a prophet, he was one of the first to champion the paintings of
Whistler and to proclaim the genius of the sculptor Rodin.
If at times Henley's verse is imperialistic, over-muscular and
strident, his noisy moments are redeemed not only by his delicate
lyrics but by his passionate enthusiasm for nobility in whatever cause
it was joined. He never disdained the actual world in any of its
moods--bus-drivers, hospital interiors, scrubwomen, a panting train,
the squalor of London's alleys, all found a voice in his lines--and
his later work contains more than a hint of the delight in science and
machinery which was later to be sounded more fully in the work of
Rudyard Kipling.
In 1889, William Butler Yeats published his _Wanderings of Oisin_; in
the same year Douglas Hyde, the scholar and folk-lorist, brought out
his _Book of Gaelic Stories_.
The revival of Gaelic and the renascence of Irish literature may be
said to date from the publication of those two books. The fundamental
idea of both men and their followers was the same. It was to create a
literature which would express the national consciousness of Ireland
through a purely national art. They began to reflect the strange
background of dreams, politics, suffering and heroism that is
immortally Irish. This community of fellowship and aims is to be found
in the varied but allied work of William Butler Yeats, "A. E." (George
W. Russell), Moira O'Neill, Lionel Johnson, Katharine Tynan, Padraic
Colum and others. The first fervor gone, a short period of dullness
set in. After reanimating the old myths, surcharging the legendary
heroes with a new significance, it seemed for a while that the
movement would lose itself in a literary mysticism. But an increasing
concern with the peasant, the migratory laborer, the tramp, followed;
an interest that was something of a reaction against the influence of
Yeats and his mystic otherworldliness. And, in 1904, the Celtic
Revival reached its height with John Millington Synge, who was not
only the greatest dramatist of the Irish Theatre, but (to quote such
contrary critics as George Moore and Harold Williams) "one of the
greatest dramatists who has written in English." Synge's poetry,
brusque and all too small in quantity, was a minor occupation with him
and yet the quality and power of it is unmistakable. Its content is
never great but the raw vigor in it was to serve as a bold banner--a
sort of a brilliant Jolly Roger--for the younger men of the following
period. It was not only this dramatist's brief verses and his
intensely musical prose but his sharp prefaces that were to exercise
such an influence.
In the notable introduction to the _Playboy of the Western World_,
Synge declared, "When I was writing _The Shadow of the Glen_ some
years ago, I got more aid than any learning could have given me from a
chink in the floor of the old Wicklow house where I was staying, that
let me hear what was being said by the servant girls in the kitchen.
This matter is, I think, of some importance; for in countries where
the imagination of the people, and the language they use, is rich and
living, it is possible for a writer to be rich and copious in his
words--and at the same time to give the reality which is at the root
of all poetry, in a natural and comprehensive form." This quotation
explains his idiom, possibly the sharpest-flavored and most vivid in
modern literature.
As to Synge's poetic power, it is unquestionably greatest in his
plays. In _The Well of the Saints_, _The Playboy of the Western World_
and _Riders to the Sea_ there are more poignance, beauty of form and
richness of language than in any piece of dramatic writing since
Elizabethan times. Yeats, when he first heard Synge's early one-act
play, _The Shadow of the Glen_, is said to have exclaimed "Euripides."
A half year later when Synge read him _Riders to the Sea_, Yeats again
confined his enthusiasm to a single word:--"AEschylus!" Years have
shown that Yeats's appreciation was not as exaggerated as many might
suppose.
But although Synge's poetry was not his major concern, numbering only
twenty-four original pieces and eighteen translations, it had a
surprising effect upon his followers. It marked a point of departure,
a reaction against both the too-polished and over-rhetorical verse of
his immediate predecessors and the dehumanized mysticism of many of
his associates. In that memorable preface to his _Poems_ he wrote what
was a slogan, a manifesto and at the same time a classic _credo_ for
all that we call the "new" poetry. "I have often thought," it begins,
"that at the side of poetic diction, which everyone condemns, modern
verse contains a great deal of poetic material, using 'poetic' in the
same special sense. The poetry of exaltation will be always the
highest; but when men lose their poetic feeling for ordinary life and
cannot write poetry of ordinary things, their exalted poetry is likely
to lose its strength of exaltation in the way that men cease to build
beautiful churches when they have lost happiness in building shops....
Even if we grant that exalted poetry can be kept successfully by
itself, the strong things of life are needed in poetry also, to show
that what is exalted or tender is not made by feeble blood."
New tendencies are contagious. But they also disclose themselves
simultaneously in places and people where there has been no point of
contact. Even before Synge published his proofs of the keen poetry in
everyday life, Kipling was illuminating, in a totally different
manner, the wealth of poetic material in things hitherto regarded as
too commonplace for poetry. Before literary England had quite
recovered from its surfeit of Victorian priggishness and
pre-Raphaelite delicacy, Kipling came along with high spirits and a
great tide of life, sweeping all before him. An obscure Anglo-Indian
journalist, the publication of his _Barrack-room Ballads_ in 1892
brought him sudden notice. By 1895 he was internationally famous.
Brushing over the pallid attempts to revive a pallid past, he rode
triumphantly on a wave of buoyant and sometimes brutal joy in the
present. Kipling gloried in the material world; he did more--he
glorified it. He pierced the coarse exteriors of seemingly prosaic
things--things like machinery, bridge-building, cockney soldiers,
slang, steam, the dirty by-products of science (witness "M'Andrews
Hymn" and "The Bell Buoy")--and uncovered their hidden glamour.
"Romance is gone," sighed most of his contemporaries,
"... and all unseen
Romance brought up the nine-fifteen."
That sentence (from his poem "The King") contains the key to the
manner in which the author of _The Five Nations_ helped to rejuvenate
English verse.
Kipling, with his perception of ordinary people in terms of ordinary
life, was one of the strongest links between the Wordsworth-Browning
era and the latest apostles of vigor, beginning with Masefield. There
are occasional and serious defects in Kipling's work--particularly in
his more facile poetry; he falls into a journalistic ease that tends
to turn into jingle; he is fond of a militaristic drum-banging that is
as blatant as the insularity he condemns. But a burning, if sometimes
too simple faith, shines through his achievements. His best work
reveals an intensity that crystallizes into beauty what was originally
tawdry, that lifts the vulgar and incidental to the place of the
universal.
All art is a twofold revivifying--a recreation of subject and a
reanimating of form. And poetry becomes perennially "new" by returning
to the old--with a different consciousness, a greater awareness. In
something startling and new by going back to 1385 and _The Canterbury
Pilgrims_. Employing both the Chaucerian model and a form similar to
the practically forgotten Byronic stanza, Masefield wrote in rapid
succession, _The Everlasting Mercy_ (1911), _The Widow in the Bye
Street_ (1912), _Dauber_ (1912), _The Daffodil Fields_ (1913)--four
astonishing rhymed narratives and four of the most remarkable poems
of our generation. Expressive of every rugged phase of life, these
poems, uniting old and new manners, responded to Synge's proclamation
that "the strong things of life are needed in poetry also ... and it
may almost be said that before verse can be human again it must be
brutal."
Masefield brought back to poetry that mixture of beauty and brutality
which is its most human and enduring quality. He brought back that
rich and almost vulgar vividness which is the very life-blood of
Chaucer, of Shakespeare, of Burns, of Villon, of Heine--and of all
those who were not only great artists but great humanists. As a purely
descriptive poet, he can take his place with the masters of sea and
landscape. As an imaginative realist, he showed those who were
stumbling from one wild eccentricity to another to thrill them, that
they themselves were wilder, stranger, far more thrilling than
anything in the world--or out of it. Few things in contemporary poetry
are as powerful as the regeneration of Saul Kane (in _The Everlasting
Mercy_) or the story of _Dauber_, the tale of a tragic sea-voyage and
a dreaming youth who wanted to be a painter. The vigorous description
of rounding Cape Horn in the latter poem is superbly done, a
masterpiece in itself. Masefield's later volumes are quieter in tone,
more measured in technique; there is an almost religious ring to many
of his Shakespearian sonnets. But the swinging surge is there, a
passionate strength that leaps through all his work from _Salt Water
Ballads_ (1902) to _Reynard the Fox_ (1919).
There is no sharp statistical line of demarcation between Masefield
and the younger men. Although several of them owe much to him, most of
the younger poets speak in accents of their own. W. W. Gibson had
already reinforced the "return to actuality" by turning from his first
preoccupation with shining knights, faultless queens, ladies in
distress and all the paraphernalia of hackneyed mediaeval romances, to
write about ferrymen, berry-pickers, stone-cutters, farmers, printers,
circus-men, carpenters--dramatizing (though sometimes theatricalizing)
the primitive emotions of uncultured and ordinary people in
_Livelihood_, _Daily Bread_ and _Fires_. This intensity had been
asking new questions. It found its answers in the war; repressed
emotionalism discovered a new outlet. One hears its echoes in the
younger poets like Siegfried Sassoon, with his poignant and unsparing
poems of conflict; in Robert Graves, who reflects it in a lighter and
more fantastic vein; in James Stephens, whose wild ingenuities are
redolent of the soil. And it finds its corresponding opposite in the
limpid and unperturbed loveliness of Ralph Hodgson; in the ghostly
magic and the nursery-rhyme whimsicality of Walter de la Mare; in the
quiet and delicate lyrics of W. H. Davies. Among the others, the
brilliant G. K. Chesterton, the facile Alfred Noyes, the romantic
Rupert Brooke (who owes less to Masefield and his immediate
predecessors than he does to the passionately intellectual Donne), the
introspective D. H. Lawrence and the versatile J. C. Squire, are
perhaps best known to American readers.
All of the poets mentioned in the foregoing paragraph (with the
exception of Noyes) have formed themselves in a loose group called
"The Georgians," and an anthology of their best work has appeared
every two years since 1913. Masefield, Lascelles Abercrombie and John
Drinkwater are also listed among the Georgian poets. When their first
collection appeared in March, 1913, Henry Newbolt, a critic as well as
poet, wrote: "These younger poets have no temptation to be false. They
are not for making something 'pretty,' something up to the standard of
professional patterns.... They write as grown men walk, each with his
own unconscious stride and gesture.... In short, they express
themselves and seem to steer without an effort between the dangers of
innovation and reminiscence." The secret of this success, and for that
matter, the success of the greater portion of English poetry, is not
an exclusive discovery of the Georgian poets. It is their inheritance,
derived from those predecessors who, "from Wordsworth and Coleridge
onward, have worked for the assimilation of verse to the manner and
accent of natural speech." In its adaptability no less than in its
vigor, modern English poetry is true to its period--and its past.
This collection is obviously a companion volume to _Modern American
Poetry_, which, in its restricted compass, attempted to act as an
introduction to recent native verse. _Modern British Poetry_ covers
the same period (from about 1870 to 1920), follows the same
chronological scheme, but it is more amplified and goes into far
greater detail than its predecessor.
The two volumes, considered together, furnish interesting contrasts;
they reveal certain similarities and certain strange differences.
Broadly speaking, modern American verse is sharp, vigorously
experimental; full of youth and its occasional--and natural--crudities.
English verse is smoother, more matured and, molded by centuries of
literature, richer in associations and surer in artistry. Where the
American output is often rude, extremely varied and uncoordinated (being
the expression of partly indigenous, partly naturalized and largely
unassimilated ideas, emotions, and races), the English product is
formulated, precise and, in spite of its fluctuations, true to its past.
It goes back to traditions as old as Chaucer (witness the narratives of
Masefield and Gibson) or tendencies as classic as Drayton, Herrick and
Blake--as in the frank lyrics of A. E. Housman, the artless lyricism of
Ralph Hodgson, the naif wonder of W. H. Davies. And if English poetry
may be compared to a broad and luxuriating river (while American poetry
might be described as a sudden rush of unconnected mountain torrents,
valley streams and city sluices), it will be inspiring to observe how
its course has been temporarily deflected in the last forty years; how
it has swung away from one tendency toward another; and how, for all its
bends and twists, it has lost neither its strength nor its nobility.
New York City.
January, 1920.
_Thomas Hardy_
Thomas Hardy was born in 1840, and has for years been famous on both
sides of the Atlantic as a writer of intense and sombre novels. His
_Tess of the D'Urbervilles_ and _Jude the Obscure_ are possibly his
best known, although his _Wessex Tales_ and _Life's Little Ironies_
are no less imposing.
It was not until he was almost sixty, in 1898 to be precise, that
Hardy abandoned prose and challenged attention as a poet. _The
Dynasts_, a drama of the Napoleonic Wars, is in three parts, nineteen
acts and one hundred and thirty scenes, a massive and most amazing
contribution to contemporary art. It is the apotheosis of Hardy the
novelist. Lascelles Abercrombie calls this work, which is partly a
historical play, partly a visionary drama, "the biggest and most
consistent exhibition of fatalism in literature." While its powerful
simplicity and tragic impressiveness overshadow his shorter poems,
many of his terse lyrics reveal the same vigor and impact of a strong
personality. His collected poems were published by The Macmillan
Company in 1919 and reveal another phase of one of the greatest living
writers of English.
Only a man harrowing clods
In a slow silent walk,
With an old horse that stumbles and nods
Half asleep as they stalk.
Only thin smoke without flame
From the heaps of couch grass:
Yet this will go onward the same
Though Dynasties pass.
Yonder a maid and her wight
Come whispering by;
War's annals will fade into night
Ere their story die.
The moving sun-shapes on the spray,
The sparkles where the brook was flowing,
Pink faces, plightings, moonlit May,--
These were the things we wished would stay;
But they were going.
Seasons of blankness as of snow,
The silent bleed of a world decaying,
The moan of multitudes in woe,--
These were the things we wished would go;
But they were staying.
(_From "The Dynasts"_)
"Had he and I but met
By some old ancient inn,
We should have sat us down to wet
Right many a nipperkin!
"But ranged as infantry,
And staring face to face,
I shot at him as he at me,
And killed him in his place.
"I shot him dead because--
Because he was my foe,
Just so: my foe of course he was;
That's clear enough; although
"He thought he'd 'list, perhaps,
Off-hand like--just as I--
Was out of work--had sold his traps--
No other reason why.
"Yes; quaint and curious war is!
You shoot a fellow down
You'd treat, if met where any bar is,
Or help to half-a-crown."
_Robert Bridges_
Robert Bridges was born in 1844 and educated at Eton and Corpus
Christi College, Oxford. After traveling extensively, he studied
medicine in London and practiced until 1882. Most of his poems, like
his occasional plays, are classical in tone as well as treatment. He
was appointed poet laureate in 1913, following Alfred Austin. His
command of the secrets of rhythm and a subtle versification give his
lines a firm delicacy and beauty of pattern.
The day begins to droop,--
Its course is done:
But nothing tells the place
Of the setting sun.
The hazy darkness deepens,
And up the lane
You may hear, but cannot see,
The homing wain.
An engine pants and hums
In the farm hard by:
Its lowering smoke is lost
In the lowering sky.
The soaking branches drip,
And all night through
The dropping will not cease
In the avenue.
A tall man there in the house
Must keep his chair:
He knows he will never again
Breathe the spring air:
His heart is worn with work;
He is giddy and sick
If he rise to go as far
As the nearest rick:
He thinks of his morn of life,
His hale, strong years;
And braves as he may the night
Of darkness and tears.
Beautiful must be the mountains whence ye come,
And bright in the fruitful valleys the streams, wherefrom
Ye learn your song:
Where are those starry woods? O might I wander there,
Among the flowers, which in that heavenly air
Bloom the year long!
Nay, barren are those mountains and spent the streams:
Our song is the voice of desire, that haunts our dreams,
A throe of the heart,
Whose pining visions dim, forbidden hopes profound,
No dying cadence nor long sigh can sound,
For all our art.
Alone, aloud in the raptured ear of men
We pour our dark nocturnal secret; and then,
As night is withdrawn
From these sweet-springing meads and bursting boughs of May,
Dream, while the innumerable choir of day
Welcome the dawn.
_Arthur O'Shaughnessy_
The Irish-English singer, Arthur William Edgar O'Shaughnessy, was born
in London in 1844. He was connected, for a while, with the British
Museum, and was transferred later to the Department of Natural
History. His first literary success, _Epic of Women_ (1870), promised
a brilliant future for the young poet, a promise strengthened by his
_Music and Moonlight_ (1874). Always delicate in health, his hopes
were dashed by periods of illness and an early death in London in
The poem here reprinted is not only O'Shaughnessy's best, but is,
because of its perfect blending of music and message, one of the
immortal classics of our verse.
We are the music-makers,
And we are the dreamers of dreams,
Wandering by lone sea-breakers,
And sitting by desolate streams;
World-losers and world-forsakers,
On whom the pale moon gleams:
Yet we are the movers and shakers
Of the world for ever, it seems.
With wonderful deathless ditties
We build up the world's great cities,
And out of a fabulous story
We fashion an empire's glory:
One man with a dream, at pleasure,
Shall go forth and conquer a crown;
And three with a new song's measure
Can trample an empire down.
We, in the ages lying
In the buried past of the earth,
Built Nineveh with our sighing,
And Babel itself with our mirth;
And o'erthrew them with prophesying
To the old of the new world's worth;
For each age is a dream that is dying,
Or one that is coming to birth.
_William Ernest Henley_
William Ernest Henley was born in 1849 and was educated at the Grammar
School of Gloucester. From childhood he was afflicted with a
tuberculous disease which finally necessitated the amputation of a
foot. His _Hospital Verses_, those vivid precursors of current free
verse, were a record of the time when he was at the infirmary at
Edinburgh; they are sharp with the sights, sensations, even the actual
smells of the sickroom. In spite (or, more probably, because) of his
continued poor health, Henley never ceased to worship strength and
energy; courage and a triumphant belief in a harsh world shine out of
the athletic _London Voluntaries_ (1892) and the lightest and most
musical lyrics in _Hawthorn and Lavender_ (1898).
The bulk of Henley's poetry is not great in volume. He has himself
explained the small quantity of his work in a Preface to his _Poems_,
first published by Charles Scribner's Sons in 1898. "A principal
reason," he says, "is that, after spending the better part of my life
in the pursuit of poetry, I found myself (about 1877) so utterly
unmarketable that I had to own myself beaten in art, and to indict
myself to journalism for the next ten years." Later on, he began to
write again--"old dusty sheaves were dragged to light; the work of
selection and correction was begun; I burned much; I found that,
after all, the lyrical instinct had slept--not died."
After a brilliant and varied career (see Preface), devoted mostly to
journalism, Henley died in 1903.
Out of the night that covers me,
Black as the Pit from pole to pole,
I thank whatever gods may be
For my unconquerable soul.
In the fell clutch of circumstance
I have not winced nor cried aloud.
Under the bludgeonings of chance
My head is bloody, but unbowed.
Beyond this place of wrath and tears
Looms but the Horror of the shade,
And yet the menace of the years
Finds, and shall find, me unafraid.
It matters not how strait the gate,
How charged with punishments the scroll,
I am the master of my fate:
I am the captain of my soul.
The nightingale has a lyre of gold,
The lark's is a clarion call,
And the blackbird plays but a boxwood flute,
But I love him best of all.
For his song is all of the joy of life,
And we in the mad, spring weather,
We two have listened till he sang
Our hearts and lips together.
It was a bowl of roses:
There in the light they lay,
Languishing, glorying, glowing
Their life away.
And the soul of them rose like a presence,
Into me crept and grew,
And filled me with something--some one--
O, was it you?
Behold me waiting--waiting for the knife.
A little while, and at a leap I storm
The thick sweet mystery of chloroform,
The drunken dark, the little death-in-life.
The gods are good to me: I have no wife,
No innocent child, to think of as I near
The fateful minute; nothing all-too dear
Unmans me for my bout of passive strife.
Yet I am tremulous and a trifle sick,
And, face to face with chance, I shrink a little:
My hopes are strong, my will is something weak.
Here comes the basket? Thank you. I am ready
But, gentlemen my porters, life is brittle:
You carry Caesar and his fortunes--Steady!
A late lark twitters from the quiet skies;
And from the west,
Where the sun, his day's work ended,
Lingers as in content,
There falls on the old, grey city
An influence luminous and serene,
A shining peace.
The smoke ascends
In a rosy-and-golden haze. The spires
Shine, and are changed. In the valley
Shadows rise. The lark sings on. The sun,
Closing his benediction,
Sinks, and the darkening air
Thrills with a sense of the triumphing night--
Night with her train of stars
And her great gift of sleep.
So be my passing!
My task accomplished and the long day done,
My wages taken, and in my heart
Some late lark singing,
Let me be gathered to the quiet west,
The sundown splendid and serene,
Death.
_Robert Louis Stevenson_
Robert Louis Stevenson was born at Edinburgh in 1850. He was at first
trained to be a lighthouse engineer, following the profession of his
family. However, he studied law instead; was admitted to the bar in
Though primarily a novelist, Stevenson has left one immortal book of
poetry which is equally at home in the nursery and the library: _A
Child's Garden of Verses_ (first published in 1885) is second only to
Mother Goose's own collection in its lyrical simplicity and universal
appeal. _Underwoods_ (1887) and _Ballads_ (1890) comprise his entire
poetic output. As a genial essayist, he is not unworthy to be ranked
with Charles Lamb. As a romancer, his fame rests securely on
_Kidnapped_, the unfinished masterpiece, _Weir of Hermiston_, and that
eternal classic of youth, _Treasure Island_.
Stevenson died after a long and dogged fight with his illness, in the
Samoan Islands in 1894.
Great is the sun, and wide he goes
Through empty heaven without repose;
And in the blue and glowing days
More thick than rain he showers his rays.
Though closer still the blinds we pull
To keep the shady parlour cool,
Yet he will find a chink or two
To slip his golden fingers through.
The dusty attic, spider-clad,
He, through the keyhole, maketh glad;
And through the broken edge of tiles
Into the laddered hay-loft smiles.
Meantime his golden face around
He bares to all the garden ground,
And sheds a warm and glittering look
Among the ivy's inmost nook.
Above the hills, along the blue,
Round the bright air with footing true,
To please the child, to paint the rose,
The gardener of the World, he goes.
Late lies the wintry sun a-bed,
A frosty, fiery sleepy-head;
Blinks but an hour or two; and then,
A blood-red orange, sets again.
Before the stars have left the skies,
At morning in the dark I rise;
And shivering in my nakedness,
By the cold candle, bathe and dress.
Close by the jolly fire I sit
To warm my frozen bones a bit;
Or with a reindeer-sled, explore
The colder countries round the door.
When to go out, my nurse doth wrap
Me in my comforter and cap;
The cold wind burns my face, and blows
Its frosty pepper up my nose.
Black are my steps on silver sod;
Thick blows my frosty breath abroad;
And tree and house, and hill and lake,
Are frosted like a wedding-cake.
I will make you brooches and toys for your delight
Of bird-song at morning and star-shine at night.
I will make a palace fit for you and me,
Of green days in forests and blue days at sea.
I will make my kitchen, and you shall keep your room,
Where white flows the river and bright blows the broom,
And you shall wash your linen and keep your body white
In rainfall at morning and dewfall at night.
And this shall be for music when no one else is near,
The fine song for singing, the rare song to hear!
That only I remember, that only you admire,
Of the broad road that stretches and the roadside fire.
Under the wide and starry sky
Dig the grave and let me lie:
Glad did I live and gladly die,
And I laid me down with a will.
This be the verse you 'grave for me:
_Here he lies where he long'd to be;
Home is the sailor, home from the sea,
And the hunter home from the hill._
_Alice Meynell_
Alice Meynell was born in London in 1850. She was educated at home and
spent a great part of her childhood in Italy. She has written little,
but that little is on an extremely high plane; her verses are simple,
pensive and always distinguished. The best of her work is in _Poems_
(1903).
A voice peals in this end of night
A phrase of notes resembling stars,
Single and spiritual notes of light.
What call they at my window-bars?
The South, the past, the day to be,
An ancient infelicity.
Darkling, deliberate, what sings
This wonderful one, alone, at peace?
What wilder things than song, what things
Sweeter than youth, clearer than Greece,
Dearer than Italy, untold
Delight, and freshness centuries old?
And first first-loves, a multitude,
The exaltation of their pain;
Ancestral childhood long renewed;
And midnights of invisible rain;
And gardens, gardens, night and day,
Gardens and childhood all the way.
What Middle Ages passionate,
O passionless voice! What distant bells
Lodged in the hills, what palace state
Illyrian! For it speaks, it tells,
Without desire, without dismay,
Some morrow and some yesterday.
All-natural things! But more--Whence came
This yet remoter mystery?
How do these starry notes proclaim
A graver still divinity?
This hope, this sanctity of fear?
_O innocent throat! O human ear!_
_Fiona Macleod_
(_William Sharp_)
William Sharp was born at Garthland Place, Scotland, in 1855. He wrote
several volumes of biography and criticism, published a book of plays
greatly influenced by Maeterlinck (_Vistas_) and was editor of "The
Canterbury Poets" series.
His feminine _alter ego_, Fiona Macleod, was a far different
personality. Sharp actually believed himself possessed of another
spirit; under the spell of this other self, he wrote several volumes
of Celtic tales, beautiful tragic romances and no little unusual
poetry. Of the prose stories written by Fiona Macleod, the most
barbaric and vivid are those collected in _The Sin-Eater and Other
Tales_; the longer _Pharais, A Romance of the Isles_, is scarcely less
unique.
In the ten years, 1882-1891, William Sharp published four volumes of
rather undistinguished verse. In 1896 _From the Hills of Dream_
appeared over the signature of Fiona Macleod; _The Hour of Beauty_, an
even more distinctive collection, followed shortly. Both poetry and
prose were always the result of two sharply differentiated moods
constantly fluctuating; the emotional mood was that of Fiona Macleod,
the intellectual and, it must be admitted the more arresting, was that
of William Sharp.
He died in 1905.
In the secret Valley of Silence
No breath doth fall;
No wind stirs in the branches;
No bird doth call:
As on a white wall
A breathless lizard is still,
So silence lies on the valley
Breathlessly still.
In the dusk-grown heart of the valley
An altar rises white:
No rapt priest bends in awe
Before its silent light:
But sometimes a flight
Of breathless words of prayer
White-wing'd enclose the altar,
Eddies of prayer.
In a fair place
Of whin and grass,
I heard feet pass
Where no one was.
I saw a face
Bloom like a flower--
Nay, as the rainbow-shower
Of a tempestuous hour.
It was not man, or woman:
It was not human:
But, beautiful and wild,
Terribly undefiled,
I knew an unborn child.
_Oscar Wilde_
Oscar Wilde was born at Dublin, Ireland, in 1856, and even as an
undergraduate at Oxford he was marked for a brilliant career. When he
was a trifle over 21 years of age, he won the Newdigate Prize with his
poem _Ravenna_.
Giving himself almost entirely to prose, he speedily became known as a
writer of brilliant epigrammatic essays and even more brilliant
paradoxical plays such as _An Ideal Husband_ and _The Importance of
Being Earnest_. His aphorisms and flippancies were quoted everywhere;
his fame as a wit was only surpassed by his notoriety as an aesthete.
(See Preface.)
Most of his poems in prose (such as _The Happy Prince_, _The Birthday
of the Infanta_ and _The Fisherman and His Soul_) are more imaginative
and richly colored than his verse; but in one long poem, _The Ballad
of Reading Gaol_ (1898), he sounded his deepest, simplest and most
enduring note. Prison was, in many ways, a regeneration for Wilde. It
not only produced _The Ballad of Reading Gaol_ but made possible his
most poignant piece of writing, _De Profundis_, only a small part of
which has been published. _Salome_, which has made the author's name a
household word, was originally written in French in 1892 and later
translated into English by Lord Alfred Douglas, accompanied by the
famous illustrations by Aubrey Beardsley. More recently this heated
drama, based on the story of Herod and Herodias, was made into an
opera by Richard Strauss.
Wilde's society plays, flashing and cynical, were the forerunners of
Bernard Shaw's audacious and far more searching ironies. One sees the
origin of a whole school of drama in such epigrams as "The history of
woman is the history of the worst form of tyranny the world has ever
known: the tyranny of the weak over the strong. It is the only tyranny
that lasts." Or "There is only one thing in the world worse than being
talked about, and that is not being talked about."
Wilde died at Paris, November 30, 1900.
Tread lightly, she is near
Under the snow,
Speak gently, she can hear
The daisies grow.
All her bright golden hair
Tarnished with rust,
She that was young and fair
Fallen to dust.
Lily-like, white as snow,
She hardly knew
She was a woman, so
Sweetly she grew.
Coffin-board, heavy stone,
Lie on her breast;
I vex my heart alone,
She is at rest.
Peace, peace; she cannot hear
Lyre or sonnet;
All my life's buried here,
Heap earth upon it.
The Thames nocturne of blue and gold
Changed to a harmony in grey;
A barge with ochre-coloured hay
Dropt from the wharf: and chill and cold
The yellow fog came creeping down
The bridges, till the houses' walls
Seemed changed to shadows, and St. Paul's
Loomed like a bubble o'er the town.
Then suddenly arose the clang
Of waking life; the streets were stirred
With country waggons; and a bird
Flew to the glistening roofs and sang.
But one pale woman all alone,
The daylight kissing her wan hair,
Loitered beneath the gas lamps' flare,
With lips of flame and heart of stone.
_John Davidson_
John Davidson was born at Barrhead, Renfrewshire, in 1857. His
_Ballads and Songs_ (1895) and _New Ballads_ (1897) attained a sudden
but too short-lived popularity, and his great promise was quenched by
an apathetic public and by his own growing disillusion and despair.
His sombre yet direct poetry never tired of repeating his favorite
theme: "Man is but the Universe grown conscious."
Davidson died by his own hand in 1909.
'A letter from my love to-day!
Oh, unexpected, dear appeal!'
She struck a happy tear away,
And broke the crimson seal.
'My love, there is no help on earth,
No help in heaven; the dead-man's bell
Must toll our wedding; our first hearth
Must be the well-paved floor of hell.'
The colour died from out her face,
Her eyes like ghostly candles shone;
She cast dread looks about the place,
Then clenched her teeth and read right on.
'I may not pass the prison door;
Here must I rot from day to day,
Unless I wed whom I abhor,
My cousin, Blanche of Valencay.
'At midnight with my dagger keen,
I'll take my life; it must be so.
Meet me in hell to-night, my queen,
For weal and woe.'
She laughed although her face was wan,
She girded on her golden belt,
She took her jewelled ivory fan,
And at her glowing missal knelt.
Then rose, 'And am I mad?' she said:
She broke her fan, her belt untied;
With leather girt herself instead,
And stuck a dagger at her side.
She waited, shuddering in her room,
Till sleep had fallen on all the house.
She never flinched; she faced her doom:
They two must sin to keep their vows.
Then out into the night she went,
And, stooping, crept by hedge and tree;
Her rose-bush flung a snare of scent,
And caught a happy memory.
She fell, and lay a minute's space;
She tore the sward in her distress;
The dewy grass refreshed her face;
She rose and ran with lifted dress.
She started like a morn-caught ghost
Once when the moon came out and stood
To watch; the naked road she crossed,
And dived into the murmuring wood.
The branches snatched her streaming cloak;
A live thing shrieked; she made no stay!
She hurried to the trysting-oak--
Right well she knew the way.
Without a pause she bared her breast,
And drove her dagger home and fell,
And lay like one that takes her rest,
And died and wakened up in hell.
She bathed her spirit in the flame,
And near the centre took her post;
From all sides to her ears there came
The dreary anguish of the lost.
The devil started at her side,
Comely, and tall, and black as jet.
'I am young Malespina's bride;
Has he come hither yet?'
'My poppet, welcome to your bed.'
'Is Malespina here?'
'Not he! To-morrow he must wed
His cousin Blanche, my dear!'
'You lie, he died with me to-night.'
'Not he! it was a plot' ... 'You lie.'
'My dear, I never lie outright.'
'We died at midnight, he and I.'
The devil went. Without a groan
She, gathered up in one fierce prayer,
Took root in hell's midst all alone,
And waited for him there.
She dared to make herself at home
Amidst the wail, the uneasy stir.
The blood-stained flame that filled the dome,
Scentless and silent, shrouded her.
How long she stayed I cannot tell;
But when she felt his perfidy,
She marched across the floor of hell;
And all the damned stood up to see.
The devil stopped her at the brink:
She shook him off; she cried, 'Away!'
'My dear, you have gone mad, I think.'
'I was betrayed: I will not stay.'
Across the weltering deep she ran;
A stranger thing was never seen:
The damned stood silent to a man;
They saw the great gulf set between.
To her it seemed a meadow fair;
And flowers sprang up about her feet
She entered heaven; she climbed the stair
And knelt down at the mercy-seat.
Seraphs and saints with one great voice
Welcomed that soul that knew not fear.
Amazed to find it could rejoice,
Hell raised a hoarse, half-human cheer.
(_From "New Year's Eve"_)
There is a dish to hold the sea,
A brazier to contain the sun,
A compass for the galaxy,
A voice to wake the dead and done!
That minister of ministers,
Imagination, gathers up
The undiscovered Universe,
Like jewels in a jasper cup.
Its flame can mingle north and south;
Its accent with the thunder strive;
The ruddy sentence of its mouth
Can make the ancient dead alive.
The mart of power, the fount of will,
The form and mould of every star,
The source and bound of good and ill,
The key of all the things that are,
Imagination, new and strange
In every age, can turn the year;
Can shift the poles and lightly change
The mood of men, the world's career.
_William Watson_
William Watson was born at Burley-in-Wharfedale, Yorkshire, August 2,
poems on Wordsworth, Shelley, and Tennyson--poems that attempted, and
sometimes successfully, to combine the manners of these masters. _The
Hope of the World_ (1897) contains some of his most characteristic
verse.
It was understood that he would be appointed poet laureate upon the
death of Alfred Austin. But some of his radical and semi-political
poems are supposed to have displeased the powers at Court, and the
honor went to Robert Bridges. His best work, which is notable for its
dignity and moulded imagination, may be found in _Selected Poems_,
published in 1903 by John Lane Co.
Let me go forth, and share
The overflowing Sun
With one wise friend, or one
Better than wise, being fair,
Where the pewit wheels and dips
On heights of bracken and ling,
And Earth, unto her leaflet tips,
Tingles with the Spring.
What is so sweet and dear
As a prosperous morn in May,
The confident prime of the day,
And the dauntless youth of the year,
When nothing that asks for bliss,
Asking aright, is denied,
And half of the world a bridegroom is,
And half of the world a bride?
The Song of Mingling flows,
Grave, ceremonial, pure,
As once, from lips that endure,
The cosmic descant rose,
When the temporal lord of life,
Going his golden way,
Had taken a wondrous maid to wife
That long had said him nay.
For of old the Sun, our sire,
Came wooing the mother of men,
Earth, that was virginal then,
Vestal fire to his fire.
Silent her bosom and coy,
But the strong god sued and pressed;
And born of their starry nuptial joy
Are all that drink of her breast.
And the triumph of him that begot,
And the travail of her that bore,
Behold, they are evermore
As warp and weft in our lot.
We are children of splendour and flame,
Of shuddering, also, and tears.
Magnificent out of the dust we came,
And abject from the Spheres.
O bright irresistible lord,
We are fruit of Earth's womb, each one,
And fruit of thy loins, O Sun,
Whence first was the seed outpoured.
To thee as our Father we bow,
Forbidden thy Father to see,
Who is older and greater than thou, as thou
Art greater and older than we.
Thou art but as a word of his speech,
Thou art but as a wave of his hand;
Thou art brief as a glitter of sand
'Twixt tide and tide on his beach;
Thou art less than a spark of his fire,
Or a moment's mood of his soul:
Thou art lost in the notes on the lips of his choir
That chant the chant of the Whole.
So, without overt breach, we fall apart,
Tacitly sunder--neither you nor I
Conscious of one intelligible Why,
And both, from severance, winning equal smart.
So, with resigned and acquiescent heart,
Whene'er your name on some chance lip may lie,
I seem to see an alien shade pass by,
A spirit wherein I have no lot or part.
Thus may a captive, in some fortress grim,
From casual speech betwixt his warders, learn
That June on her triumphal progress goes
Through arched and bannered woodlands; while for him
She is a legend emptied of concern,
And idle is the rumour of the rose.
April, April,
Laugh thy girlish laughter;
Then, the moment after,
Weep thy girlish tears,
April, that mine ears
Like a lover greetest,
If I tell thee, sweetest,
All my hopes and fears.
April, April,
Laugh thy golden laughter,
But, the moment after,
Weep thy golden tears!
by John Lane Company. Reprinted by permission of the publishers.
by John Lane Company. Reprinted by permission of the publishers.
_Francis Thompson_
Born in 1859 at Preston, Francis Thompson was educated at Owen's
College, Manchester. Later he tried all manner of strange ways of
earning a living. He was, at various times, assistant in a boot-shop,
medical student, collector for a book seller and homeless vagabond;
there was a period in his life when he sold matches on the streets of
London. He was discovered in terrible poverty (having given up
everything except poetry and opium) by the editor of a magazine to
which he had sent some verses the year before. Almost immediately
thereafter he became famous. His exalted mysticism is seen at its
purest in "A Fallen Yew" and "The Hound of Heaven." Coventry Patmore,
the distinguished poet of an earlier period, says of the latter poem,
which is unfortunately too long to quote, "It is one of the very few
_great_ odes of which our language can boast."
Thompson died, after a fragile and spasmodic life, in St. John's Wood
in November, 1907.
Where the thistle lifts a purple crown
Six foot out of the turf,
And the harebell shakes on the windy hill--
O breath of the distant surf!--
The hills look over on the South,
And southward dreams the sea;
And with the sea-breeze hand in hand
Came innocence and she.
Where 'mid the gorse the raspberry
Red for the gatherer springs;
Two children did we stray and talk
Wise, idle, childish things.
She listened with big-lipped surprise,
Breast-deep 'mid flower and spine:
Her skin was like a grape whose veins
Run snow instead of wine.
She knew not those sweet words she spake,
Nor knew her own sweet way;
But there's never a bird, so sweet a song
Thronged in whose throat all day.
Oh, there were flowers in Storrington
On the turf and on the spray;
But the sweetest flower on Sussex hills
Was the Daisy-flower that day!
Her beauty smoothed earth's furrowed face.
She gave me tokens three:--
A look, a word of her winsome mouth,
And a wild raspberry.
A berry red, a guileless look,
A still word,--strings of sand!
And yet they made my wild, wild heart
Fly down to her little hand.
For standing artless as the air,
And candid as the skies,
She took the berries with her hand,
And the love with her sweet eyes.
The fairest things have fleetest end,
Their scent survives their close:
But the rose's scent is bitterness
To him that loved the rose.
She looked a little wistfully,
Then went her sunshine way:--
The sea's eye had a mist on it,
And the leaves fell from the day.
She went her unremembering way,
She went and left in me
The pang of all the partings gone,
And partings yet to be.
She left me marvelling why my soul
Was sad that she was glad;
At all the sadness in the sweet,
The sweetness in the sad.
Still, still I seemed to see her, still
Look up with soft replies,
And take the berries with her hand,
And the love with her lovely eyes.
Nothing begins, and nothing ends,
That is not paid with moan,
For we are born in other's pain,
And perish in our own.
I fear to love thee, Sweet, because
Love's the ambassador of loss;
White flake of childhood, clinging so
To my soiled raiment, thy shy snow
At tenderest touch will shrink and go.
Love me not, delightful child.
My heart, by many snares beguiled,
Has grown timorous and wild.
It would fear thee not at all,
Wert thou not so harmless-small.
Because thy arrows, not yet dire,
Are still unbarbed with destined fire,
I fear thee more than hadst thou stood
Full-panoplied in womanhood.
Trouble the bright
And silver waters of the moon.
The Maiden of the Morn will soon
Through Heaven stray and sing,
Star gathering.
Now while the dark about our loves is strewn,
Light of my dark, blood of my heart, O come!
And night will catch her breath up, and be dumb.
Leave thy father, leave thy mother
And thy brother;
Leave the black tents of thy tribe apart!
Am I not thy father and thy brother,
And thy mother?
And thou--what needest with thy tribe's black
tents
Who hast the red pavilion of my heart?
_A. E. Housman_
A. E. Housman was born March 26, 1859, and, after a classical
education, he was, for ten years, a Higher Division Clerk in H. M.
Patent Office. Later in life, he became a teacher.
Housman has published only one volume of original verse, but that
volume (_A Shropshire Lad_) is known wherever modern English poetry is
read. Originally published in 1896, when Housman was almost 37, it is
evident that many of these lyrics were written when the poet was much
younger. Echoing the frank pessimism of Hardy and the harder cynicism
of Heine, Housman struck a lighter and more buoyant note. Underneath
his dark ironies, there is a rustic humor that has many subtle
variations. From a melodic standpoint, _A Shropshire Lad_ is a
collection of exquisite, haunting and almost perfect songs.
Housman has been a professor of Latin since 1892 and, besides his
immortal set of lyrics, has edited Juvenal and the books of Manilius.
Wake: the silver dusk returning
Up the beach of darkness brims,
And the ship of sunrise burning
Strands upon the eastern rims.
Wake: the vaulted shadow shatters,
Trampled to the floor it spanned,
And the tent of night in tatters
Straws the sky-pavilioned land.
Up, lad, up, 'tis late for lying:
Hear the drums of morning play;
Hark, the empty highways crying
"Who'll beyond the hills away?"
Towns and countries woo together,
Forelands beacon, belfries call;
Never lad that trod on leather
Lived to feast his heart with all.
Up, lad: thews that lie and cumber
Sunlit pallets never thrive;
Morns abed and daylight slumber
Were not meant for man alive.
Clay lies still, but blood's a rover;
Breath's a ware that will not keep.
Up, lad: when the journey's over
There'll be time enough to sleep.
When I was one-and-twenty
I heard a wise man say,
"Give crowns and pounds and guineas
But not your heart away;
Give pearls away and rubies
But keep your fancy free."
But I was one-and-twenty,
No use to talk to me.
When I was one-and-twenty
I heard him say again,
"The heart out of the bosom
Was never given in vain;
'Tis paid with sighs a-plenty
And sold for endless rue."
And I am two-and-twenty,
And oh, 'tis true, 'tis true.
With rue my heart is laden
For golden friends I had,
For many a rose-lipt maiden
And many a lightfoot lad.
By brooks too broad for leaping
The lightfoot boys are laid;
The rose-lipt girls are sleeping
In fields where roses fade.
The time you won your town the race
We chaired you through the market-place;
Man and boy stood cheering by,
And home we brought you shoulder-high.
To-day, the road all runners come,
Shoulder-high we bring you home,
And set you at your threshold down,
Townsman of a stiller town.
Smart lad, to slip betimes away
From fields where glory does not stay,
And early though the laurel grows
It withers quicker than the rose.
Eyes the shady night has shut
Cannot see the record cut,
And silence sounds no worse than cheers
After earth has stopped the ears:
Now you will not swell the rout
Of lads that wore their honours out,
Runners whom renown outran
And the name died before the man.
So set, before its echoes fade,
The fleet foot on the sill of shade,
And hold to the low lintel up
The still-defended challenge-cup.
And round that early-laurelled head
Will flock to gaze the strengthless dead,
And find unwithered on its curls
The garland briefer than a girl's.
Loveliest of trees, the cherry now
Is hung with bloom along the bough,
And stands about the woodland ride
Wearing white for Eastertide.
Now, of my threescore years and ten,
Twenty will not come again,
And take from seventy springs a score,
It only leaves me fifty more.
And since to look at things in bloom
Fifty springs are little room,
About the woodlands I will go
To see the cherry hung with snow.
_Douglas Hyde_
Doctor Douglas Hyde was born in Roscommon County, Ireland in, as
nearly as can be ascertained, 1860. One of the most brilliant Irish
scholars of his day, he has worked indefatigably for the cause of his
native letters. He has written a comprehensive history of Irish
literature; has compiled, edited and translated into English the _Love
Songs of Connaught_; is President of The Irish National Literary
Society; and is the author of innumerable poems in Gaelic--far more
than he ever wrote in English. His collections of Irish folk-lore and
poetry were among the most notable contributions to the Celtic
revival; they were (see Preface), to a large extent, responsible for
it. Since 1909 he has been Professor of Modern Irish in University
College, Dublin.
The poem which is here quoted is one of his many brilliant and
reanimating translations. In its music and its peculiar rhyme-scheme,
it reproduces the peculiar flavor as well as the meter of the West
Irish original.
For thee, I shall not die,
Woman of high fame and name;
Foolish men thou mayest slay
I and they are not the same.
Why should I expire
For the fire of an eye,
Slender waist or swan-like limb,
Is't for them that I should die?
The round breasts, the fresh skin,
Cheeks crimson, hair so long and rich;
Indeed, indeed, I shall not die,
Please God, not I, for any such.
The golden hair, the forehead thin,
The chaste mien, the gracious ease,
The rounded heel, the languid tone,--
Fools alone find death from these.
Thy sharp wit, thy perfect calm,
Thy thin palm like foam o' the sea;
Thy white neck, thy blue eye,
I shall not die for thee.
Woman, graceful as the swan,
A wise man did nurture me.
Little palm, white neck, bright eye,
I shall not die for ye.
_Amy Levy_
Amy Levy, a singularly gifted Jewess, was born at Clapham, in 1861. A
fiery young poet, she burdened her own intensity with the sorrows of
her race. She wrote one novel, _Reuben Sachs_, and two volumes of
poetry--the more distinctive of the two being half-pathetically and
half-ironically entitled _A Minor Poet_ (1884). After several years of
brooding introspection, she committed suicide in 1889 at the age of
(_On a commonplace person who died in bed_)
This is the end of him, here he lies:
The dust in his throat, the worm in his eyes,
The mould in his mouth, the turf on his breast;
This is the end of him, this is best.
He will never lie on his couch awake,
Wide-eyed, tearless, till dim daybreak.
Never again will he smile and smile
When his heart is breaking all the while.
He will never stretch out his hands in vain
Groping and groping--never again.
Never ask for bread, get a stone instead,
Never pretend that the stone is bread;
Nor sway and sway 'twixt the false and true,
Weighing and noting the long hours through.
Never ache and ache with the choked-up sighs;
This is the end of him, here he lies.
How like her! But 'tis she herself,
Comes up the crowded street,
How little did I think, the morn,
My only love to meet!
Who else that motion and that mien?
Whose else that airy tread?
For one strange moment I forgot
My only love was dead.
_Katharine Tynan Hinkson_
Katharine Tynan was born at Dublin in 1861, and educated at the
Convent of St. Catherine at Drogheda. She married Henry Hinkson, a
lawyer and author, in 1893. Her poetry is largely actuated by
religious themes, and much of her verse is devotional and yet
distinctive. In _New Poems_ (1911) she is at her best; graceful,
meditative and with occasional notes of deep pathos.
All in the April morning,
April airs were abroad;
The sheep with their little lambs
Pass'd me by on the road.
The sheep with their little lambs
Pass'd me by on the road;
All in an April evening
I thought on the Lamb of God.
The lambs were weary, and crying
With a weak human cry;
I thought on the Lamb of God
Going meekly to die.
Up in the blue, blue mountains
Dewy pastures are sweet:
Rest for the little bodies,
Rest for the little feet.
Rest for the Lamb of God
Up on the hill-top green;
Only a cross of shame
Two stark crosses between.
All in the April evening,
April airs were abroad;
I saw the sheep with their lambs,
And thought on the Lamb of God.
The door of Heaven is on the latch
To-night, and many a one is fain
To go home for one's night's watch
With his love again.
Oh, where the father and mother sit
There's a drift of dead leaves at the door
Like pitter-patter of little feet
That come no more.
Their thoughts are in the night and cold,
Their tears are heavier than the clay,
But who is this at the threshold
So young and gay?
They are come from the land o' the young,
They have forgotten how to weep;
Words of comfort on the tongue,
And a kiss to keep.
They sit down and they stay awhile,
Kisses and comfort none shall lack;
At morn they steal forth with a smile
And a long look back.
_Owen Seaman_
One of the most delightful of English versifiers, Owen Seaman, was
born in 1861. After receiving a classical education, he became
Professor of Literature and began to write for Punch in 1894. In 1906
he was made editor of that internationally famous weekly, remaining in
that capacity ever since. He was knighted in 1914. As a writer of
light verse and as a parodist, his agile work has delighted a
generation of admirers. Some of his most adroit lines may be found in
his _In Cap and Bells_ (1902) and _The Battle of the Bays_ (1892).
(_Who Contends that Christmas is Played Out_)
O frankly bald and obviously stout!
And so you find that Christmas as a fete
Dispassionately viewed, is getting out
Of date.
The studied festal air is overdone;
The humour of it grows a little thin;
You fail, in fact, to gather where the fun
Comes in.
Visions of very heavy meals arise
That tend to make your organism shiver;
Roast beef that irks, and pies that agonise
The liver;
Those pies at which you annually wince,
Hearing the tale how happy months will follow
Proportioned to the total mass of mince
You swallow.
Visions of youth whose reverence is scant,
Who with the brutal _verve_ of boyhood's prime
Insist on being taken to the pant-
-omime.
Of infants, sitting up extremely late,
Who run you on toboggans down the stair;
Or make you fetch a rug and simulate
A bear.
This takes your faultless trousers at the knees,
The other hurts them rather more behind;
And both effect a fracture in your ease
Of mind.
My good dyspeptic, this will never do;
Your weary withers must be sadly wrung!
Yet once I well believe that even you
Were young.
Time was when you devoured, like other boys,
Plum-pudding sequent on a turkey-hen;
With cracker-mottos hinting of the joys
Of men.
Time was when 'mid the maidens you would pull
The fiery raisin with profound delight;
When sprigs of mistletoe seemed beautiful
And right.
Old Christmas changes not! Long, long ago
He won the treasure of eternal youth;
_Yours_ is the dotage--if you want to know
The truth.
Come, now, I'll cure your case, and ask no fee:--
Make others' happiness this once your own;
All else may pass: that joy can never be
Outgrown!
Facing the guns, he jokes as well
As any Judge upon the Bench;
Between the crash of shell and shell
His laughter rings along the trench;
He seems immensely tickled by a
Projectile while he calls a "Black Maria."
He whistles down the day-long road,
And, when the chilly shadows fall
And heavier hangs the weary load,
Is he down-hearted? Not at all.
'Tis then he takes a light and airy
His songs are not exactly hymns;
He never learned them in the choir;
And yet they brace his dragging limbs
Although they miss the sacred fire;
Although his choice and cherished gems
Do not include "The Watch upon the Thames."
He takes to fighting as a game;
He does no talking, through his hat,
Of holy missions; all the same
He has his faith--be sure of that;
He'll not disgrace his sporting breed,
Nor play what isn't cricket. There's his creed.
Allied armies during the World's War.
_Henry Newbolt_
Henry Newbolt was born at Bilston in 1862. His early work was frankly
imitative of Tennyson; he even attempted to add to the Arthurian
legends with a drama in blank verse entitled _Mordred_ (1895). It was
not until he wrote his sea-ballads that he struck his own note. With
the publication of _Admirals All_ (1897) his fame was widespread. The
popularity of his lines was due not so much to the subject-matter of
Newbolt's verse as to the breeziness of his music, the solid beat of
rhythm, the vigorous swing of his stanzas.
In 1898 Newbolt published _The Island Race_, which contains about
thirty more of his buoyant songs of the sea. Besides being a poet,
Newbolt has written many essays and his critical volume, _A New Study
of English Poetry_ (1917), is a collection of articles that are both
analytical and alive.
Drake he's in his hammock an' a thousand mile away,
(Capten, art tha sleepin' there below?)
Slung atween the round shot in Nombre Dios Bay,
An' dreamin' arl the time o' Plymouth Hoe.
Yarnder lumes the island, yarnder lie the ships,
Wi' sailor lads a-dancin' heel-an'-toe,
An' the shore-lights flashin', an' the night-tide dashin'
He sees et arl so plainly as he saw et long ago.
Drake he was a Devon man, an' ruled the Devon seas,
(Capten, art tha sleepin' there below?),
Rovin' tho' his death fell, he went wi' heart at ease,
An' dreamin' arl the time o' Plymouth Hoe,
"Take my drum to England, hang et by the shore,
Strike et when your powder's runnin' low;
If the Dons sight Devon, I'll quit the port o' Heaven,
An' drum them up the Channel as we drummed them long ago."
Drake he's in his hammock till the great Armadas come,
(Capten, art tha sleepin' there below?),
Slung atween the round shot, listenin' for the drum,
An' dreamin' arl the time o' Plymouth Hoe.
Call him on the deep sea, call him up the Sound,
Call him when ye sail to meet the foe;
Where the old trade's plyin' an' the old flag flyin',
They shall find him, ware an' wakin', as they found him long ago.
_Arthur Symons_
Born in 1865, Arthur Symons' first few publications revealed an
intellectual rather than an emotional passion. Those volumes were full
of the artifice of the period, but Symons's technical skill and
frequent analysis often saved the poems from complete decadence. His
later books are less imitative; the influence of Verlaine and
Baudelaire is not so apparent; the sophistication is less cynical, the
sensuousness more restrained. His various collections of essays and
stories reflect the same peculiar blend of rich intellectuality and
perfumed romanticism that one finds in his most characteristic poems.
Of his many volumes in prose, _Spiritual Adventures_ (1905), while
obviously influenced by Walter Pater, is by far the most original; a
truly unique volume of psychological short stories. The best of his
poetry up to 1902 was collected in two volumes, _Poems_, published by
John Lane Co. _The Fool of the World_ appeared in 1907.
I have grown tired of sorrow and human tears;
Life is a dream in the night, a fear among fears,
A naked runner lost in a storm of spears.
I have grown tired of rapture and love's desire;
Love is a flaming heart, and its flames aspire
Till they cloud the soul in the smoke of a windy fire.
I would wash the dust of the world in a soft green flood;
Here between sea and sea, in the fairy wood,
I have found a delicate, wave-green solitude.
Here, in the fairy wood, between sea and sea,
I have heard the song of a fairy bird in a tree,
And the peace that is not in the world has flown to me.
I am the torch, she saith, and what to me
If the moth die of me? I am the flame
Of Beauty, and I burn that all may see
Beauty, and I have neither joy nor shame,
But live with that clear light of perfect fire
Which is to men the death of their desire.
I am Yseult and Helen, I have seen
Troy burn, and the most loving knight lie dead.
The world has been my mirror, time has been
My breath upon the glass; and men have said,
Age after age, in rapture and despair,
Love's poor few words, before my image there.
I live, and am immortal; in my eyes
The sorrow of the world, and on my lips
The joy of life, mingle to make me wise;
Yet now the day is darkened with eclipse:
Who is there still lives for beauty? Still am I
The torch, but where's the moth that still dares die?
_William Butler Yeats_
Born at Sandymount, Dublin, in 1865, the son of John B. Yeats, the
Irish artist, the greater part of William Butler Yeats' childhood was
spent in Sligo. Here he became imbued with the power and richness of
native folk-lore; he drank in the racy quality through the quaint
fairy stories and old wives' tales of the Irish peasantry. (Later he
published a collection of these same stories.)
It was in the activities of a "Young Ireland" society that Yeats
became identified with the new spirit; he dreamed of a national poetry
that would be written in English and yet would be definitely Irish. In
a few years he became one of the leaders in the Celtic revival. He
worked incessantly for the cause, both as propagandist and playwright;
and, though his mysticism at times seemed the product of a cult rather
than a Celt, his symbolic dramas were acknowledged to be full of a
haunting, other-world spirituality. (See Preface.) _The Hour Glass_
(1904), his second volume of "Plays for an Irish Theatre," includes
his best one-act dramas with the exception of his unforgettable _The
Land of Heart's Desire_ (1894). _The Wind Among the Reeds_ (1899)
contains several of his most beautiful and characteristic poems.
Others who followed Yeats have intensified the Irish drama; they have
established a closer contact between the peasant and poet. No one,
however, has had so great a part in the shaping of modern drama in
Ireland as Yeats. His _Deirdre_ (1907), a beautiful retelling of the
great Gaelic legend, is far more dramatic than the earlier plays; it
is particularly interesting to read with Synge's more idiomatic play
on the same theme, _Deirdre of the Sorrows_.
The poems of Yeats which are quoted here reveal him in his most lyric
and musical vein.
I will arise and go now, and go to Innisfree,
And a small cabin build there, of clay and wattles made;
Nine bean rows will I have there, a hive for the honey bee,
And live alone in the bee-loud glade.
And I shall have some peace there, for peace comes dropping slow,
Dropping from the veils of the morning to where the cricket sings;
There midnight's all a glimmer, and noon a purple glow,
And evening full of the linnet's wings.
I will arise and go now, for always night and day
I hear lake water lapping with low sounds by the shore;
While I stand on the roadway, or on the pavements gray,
I hear it in the deep heart's core.
I rise in the dawn, and I kneel and blow
Till the seed of the fire flicker and glow.
And then I must scrub, and bake, and sweep,
Till stars are beginning to blink and peep;
But the young lie long and dream in their bed
Of the matching of ribbons, the blue and the red,
And their day goes over in idleness,
And they sigh if the wind but lift up a tress.
While I must work, because I am old
And the seed of the fire gets feeble and cold.
A Queen was beloved by a jester,
And once when the owls grew still
He made his soul go upward
And stand on her window sill.
In a long and straight blue garment,
It talked before morn was white,
And it had grown wise by thinking
Of a footfall hushed and light.
But the young queen would not listen;
She rose in her pale nightgown,
She drew in the brightening casement
And pushed the brass bolt down.
He bade his heart go to her,
When the bats cried out no more,
In a red and quivering garment
It sang to her through the door.
The tongue of it sweet with dreaming
Of a flutter of flower-like hair,
But she took up her fan from the table
And waved it off on the air.
'I've cap and bells,' he pondered,
'I will send them to her and die.'
And as soon as the morn had whitened
He left them where she went by.
She laid them upon her bosom,
Under a cloud of her hair,
And her red lips sang them a love song.
The stars grew out of the air.
She opened her door and her window,
And the heart and the soul came through,
To her right hand came the red one,
To her left hand came the blue.
They set up a noise like crickets,
A chattering wise and sweet,
And her hair was a folded flower,
And the quiet of love her feet.
Down by the salley gardens my love and I did meet;
She passed the salley gardens with little snow-white feet.
She bid me take love easy, as the leaves grow on the tree;
But I, being young and foolish, with her would not agree.
In a field by the river my love and I did stand,
And on my leaning shoulder she laid her snow-white hand.
She bid me take life easy, as the grass grows on the weirs;
But I was young and foolish, and now am full of tears.
_Rudyard Kipling_
Born at Bombay, India, December 30, 1865, Rudyard Kipling, the author
of a dozen contemporary classics, was educated in England. He
returned, however, to India and took a position on the staff of "The
Lahore Civil and Military Gazette," writing for the Indian press until
about 1890, when he went to England, where he has lived ever since,
with the exception of a short sojourn in America.
Even while he was still in India he achieved a popular as well as a
literary success with his dramatic and skilful tales, sketches and
ballads of Anglo-Indian life.
_Soldiers Three_ (1888) was the first of six collections of short
stories brought out in "Wheeler's Railway Library." They were followed
by the far more sensitive and searching _Plain Tales from the Hills_,
_Under the Deodars_ and _The Phantom 'Rikshaw_, which contains two of
the best and most convincing ghost-stories in recent literature.
These tales, however, display only one side of Kipling's extraordinary
talents. As a writer of children's stories, he has few living equals.
_Wee Willie Winkie_, which contains that stirring and heroic fragment
"Drums of the Fore and Aft," is only a trifle less notable than his
more obviously juvenile collections. _Just-So Stories_ and the two
_Jungle Books_ (prose interspersed with lively rhymes) are classics
for young people of all ages. _Kim_, the novel of a super-Mowgli grown
up, is a more mature masterpiece.
Considered solely as a poet (see Preface) he is one of the most
vigorous and unique figures of his time. The spirit of romance surges
under his realities. His brisk lines conjure up the tang of a
countryside in autumn, the tingle of salt spray, the rude sentiment of
ruder natures, the snapping of a banner, the lurch and rumble of the
sea. His poetry is woven of the stuff of myths; but it never loses its
hold on actualities. Kipling himself in his poem "The Benefactors"
Ah! What avails the classic bent
And what the cultured word,
Against the undoctored incident
That actually occurred?
Kipling won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1907. His varied poems
have finally been collected in a remarkable one-volume _Inclusive
Edition_ (1885-1918), an indispensable part of any student's library.
This gifted and prolific creator, whose work was affected by the war,
has frequently lapsed into bombast and a journalistic imperialism. At
his best he is unforgettable, standing mountain-high above his host of
imitators. His home is at Burwash, Sussex.
You may talk o' gin an' beer
When you're quartered safe out 'ere,
An' you're sent to penny-fights an' Aldershot it;
But if it comes to slaughter
You will do your work on water,
An' you'll lick the bloomin' boots of 'im that's got it
Now in Injia's sunny clime,
Where I used to spend my time
A-servin' of 'Er Majesty the Queen,
Of all them black-faced crew
The finest man I knew
It was "Din! Din! Din!
You limping lump o' brick-dust, Gunga Din!
Hi! _slippy hitherao!_
You squidgy-nosed old idol, Gunga Din!"
The uniform 'e wore
Was nothin' much before,
An' rather less than 'arf o' that be'ind,
For a twisty piece o' rag
An' a goatskin water-bag
Was all the field-equipment 'e could find.
When the sweatin' troop-train lay
In a sidin' through the day,
Where the 'eat would make your bloomin' eyebrows crawl,
Till our throats were bricky-dry,
Then we wopped 'im 'cause 'e couldn't serve us all.
It was "Din! Din! Din!
You 'eathen, where the mischief 'ave you been?
If you don't fill up my helmet, Gunga Din!"
'E would dot an' carry one
Till the longest day was done,
An' 'e didn't seem to know the use o' fear.
If we charged or broke or cut,
You could bet your bloomin' nut,
'E'd be waitin' fifty paces right flank rear.
'E would skip with our attack,
An' watch us till the bugles made "Retire."
An' for all 'is dirty 'ide,
'E was white, clear white, inside
When 'e went to tend the wounded under fire!
It was "Din! Din! Din!"
With the bullets kickin' dust-spots on the green.
When the cartridges ran out,
You could 'ear the front-files shout:
"Hi! ammunition-mules an' Gunga Din!"
I sha'n't forgit the night
When I dropped be'ind the fight
With a bullet where my belt-plate should 'a' been.
I was chokin' mad with thirst,
An' the man that spied me first
Was our good old grinnin', gruntin' Gunga Din.
'E lifted up my 'ead,
An' 'e plugged me where I bled,
An' 'e guv me 'arf-a-pint o' water--green;
It was crawlin' an' it stunk,
But of all the drinks I've drunk,
I'm gratefullest to one from Gunga Din.
It was "Din! Din! Din!
'Ere's a beggar with a bullet through 'is spleen;
'E's chawin' up the ground an' 'e's kickin' all around:
For Gawd's sake, git the water, Gunga Din!"
'E carried me away
To where a _dooli_ lay,
An' a bullet come an' drilled the beggar clean.
'E put me safe inside,
An' just before 'e died:
"I 'ope you liked your drink," sez Gunga Din.
So I'll meet 'im later on
In the place where 'e is gone--
Where it's always double drill and no canteen;
'E'll be squattin' on the coals
Givin' drink to pore damned souls,
An' I'll get a swig in Hell from Gunga Din!
Din! Din! Din!
You Lazarushian-leather Gunga Din!
Tho' I've belted you an' flayed you,
By the livin' Gawd that made you,
You're a better man than I am, Gunga Din!
Peace is declared, and I return
To 'Ackneystadt, but not the same;
Things 'ave transpired which made me learn
The size and meanin' of the game.
I did no more than others did,
I don't know where the change began;
I started as a average kid,
I finished as a thinkin' man.
_If England was what England seems
An not the England of our dreams,
But only putty, brass, an' paint,
'Ow quick we'd drop 'er!_ But she ain't!
Before my gappin' mouth could speak
I 'eard it in my comrade's tone;
I saw it on my neighbour's cheek
Before I felt it flush my own.
An' last it come to me--not pride,
Nor yet conceit, but on the 'ole
(If such a term may be applied),
The makin's of a bloomin' soul.
Rivers at night that cluck an' jeer,
Plains which the moonshine turns to sea,
Mountains that never let you near,
An' stars to all eternity;
An' the quick-breathin' dark that fills
The 'ollows of the wilderness,
When the wind worries through the 'ills--
These may 'ave taught me more or less.
Towns without people, ten times took,
An' ten times left an' burned at last;
An' starvin' dogs that come to look
For owners when a column passed;
An' quiet, 'omesick talks between
Men, met by night, you never knew
Until--'is face--by shellfire seen--
Once--an' struck off. They taught me, too.
The day's lay-out--the mornin' sun
Beneath your 'at-brim as you sight;
The dinner-'ush from noon till one,
An' the full roar that lasts till night;
An' the pore dead that look so old
An' was so young an hour ago,
An' legs tied down before they're cold--
These are the things which make you know.
Also Time runnin' into years--
A thousand Places left be'ind--
An' Men from both two 'emispheres
Discussin' things of every kind;
So much more near than I 'ad known,
So much more great than I 'ad guessed--
An' me, like all the rest, alone--
But reachin' out to all the rest!
So 'ath it come to me--not pride,
Nor yet conceit, but on the 'ole
(If such a term may be applied),
The makin's of a bloomin' soul.
But now, discharged, I fall away
To do with little things again....
Gawd, 'oo knows all I cannot say,
Look after me in Thamesfontein!
_If England was what England seems
An' not the England of our dreams,
But only putty, brass, an' paint,
'Ow quick we'd chuck 'er!_ But she ain't!
When the flush of a newborn sun fell first on Eden's
green and gold,
Our father Adam sat under the Tree and scratched with
a stick in the mold;
And the first rude sketch that the world had seen was
joy to his mighty heart,
Till the Devil whispered behind the leaves: "It's pretty,
but is it Art?"
Wherefore he called to his wife and fled to fashion
his work anew--
The first of his race who cared a fig for the first, most
dread review;
And he left his lore to the use of his sons--and that was
a glorious gain
When the Devil chuckled: "Is it Art?" in the ear of
the branded Cain.
They builded a tower to shiver the sky and wrench the
stars apart,
Till the Devil grunted behind the bricks: "It's striking,
but is it Art?"
The stone was dropped by the quarry-side, and the idle
derrick swung,
While each man talked of the aims of art, and each in
an alien tongue.
They fought and they talked in the north and the south,
they talked and they fought in the west,
Till the waters rose on the jabbering land, and the poor
Red Clay had rest--
Had rest till the dank blank-canvas dawn when the dove
was preened to start,
And the Devil bubbled below the keel: "It's human, but
is it Art?"
The tale is old as the Eden Tree--as new as the new-cut
tooth--
For each man knows ere his lip-thatch grows he is
master of Art and Truth;
And each man hears as the twilight nears, to the beat of
his dying heart,
The Devil drum on the darkened pane: "You did it,
but was it Art?"
We have learned to whittle the Eden Tree to the shape
of a surplice-peg,
We have learned to bottle our parents twain in the yolk
of an addled egg,
We know that the tail must wag the dog, as the horse
is drawn by the cart;
But the Devil whoops, as he whooped of old: "It's clever,
but is it Art?"
When the flicker of London's sun falls faint on the club-
room's green and gold,
The sons of Adam sit them down and scratch with their
pens in the mold--
They scratch with their pens in the mold of their graves,
and the ink and the anguish start
When the Devil mutters behind the leaves: "It's pretty,
but is it art?"
Now, if we could win to the Eden Tree where the four
great rivers flow,
And the wreath of Eve is red on the turf as she left it
long ago,
And if we could come when the sentry slept, and softly
scurry through,
By the favor of God we might know as much--as our
father Adam knew.
To the Heavens above us
O look and behold
The Planets that love us
All harnessed in gold!
What chariots, what horses
Against us shall bide
While the Stars in their courses
Do fight on our side?
All thought, all desires,
That are under the sun,
Are one with their fires,
As we also are one:
All matter, all spirit,
All fashion, all frame,
Receive and inherit
Their strength from the same.
(Oh, man that deniest
All power save thine own,
Their power in the highest
Is mightily shown.
Not less in the lowest
That power is made clear.
Oh, man, if thou knowest,
What treasure is here!)
Earth quakes in her throes
And we wonder for why!
But the blind planet knows
When her ruler is nigh;
And, attuned since Creation
To perfect accord,
She thrills in her station
And yearns to her Lord.
The waters have risen,
The springs are unbound--
The floods break their prison,
And ravin around.
No rampart withstands 'em,
Their fury will last,
Till the Sign that commands 'em
Sinks low or swings past.
Through abysses unproven
And gulfs beyond thought,
Our portion is woven,
Our burden is brought.
Yet They that prepare it,
Whose Nature we share,
Make us who must bear is
Well able to bear.
Though terrors o'ertake us
We'll not be afraid.
No power can unmake us
Save that which has made.
Nor yet beyond reason
Or hope shall we fall--
All things have their season,
And Mercy crowns all!
Then, doubt not, ye fearful--
The Eternal is King--
Up, heart, and be cheerful,
And lustily sing:--
_What chariots, what horses
Against us shall bide
While the Stars in their courses
Do fight on our side?_
often one of the most devoted of the Queen's servants. He is also
appreciated by the men.
Doubleday, Page & Co. and A. P. Watt & Son.
Doubleday, Page and Co. and A. P. Watt & Son.
_Richard Le Gallienne_
Richard Le Gallienne, who, in spite of his long residence in the
United States, must be considered an English poet, was born at
Liverpool in 1866. He entered on a business career soon after leaving
Liverpool College, but gave up commercial life to become a man of
letters after five or six years.
His early work was strongly influenced by the artificialities of the
aesthetic movement (see Preface); the indebtedness to Oscar Wilde is
especially evident. A little later Keats was the dominant influence,
and _English Poems_ (1892) betray how deep were Le Gallienne's
admirations. His more recent poems in _The Lonely Dancer_ (1913) show
a keener individuality and a finer lyrical passion. His prose fancies
are well known--particularly _The Book Bills of Narcissus_ and the
charming and high-spirited fantasia, _The Quest of the Golden Girl_.
Le Gallienne came to America about 1905 and has lived ever since in
Rowayton, Conn., and New York City.
Ah, London! London! our delight,
Great flower that opens but at night,
Great City of the midnight sun,
Whose day begins when day is done.
Lamp after lamp against the sky
Opens a sudden beaming eye,
Leaping alight on either hand,
The iron lilies of the Strand.
Like dragonflies, the hansoms hover,
With jeweled eyes, to catch the lover;
The streets are full of lights and loves,
Soft gowns, and flutter of soiled doves.
The human moths about the light
Dash and cling close in dazed delight,
And burn and laugh, the world and wife,
For this is London, this is life!
Upon thy petals butterflies,
But at thy root, some say, there lies,
A world of weeping trodden things,
Poor worms that have not eyes or wings.
From out corruption of their woe
Springs this bright flower that charms us so,
Men die and rot deep out of sight
To keep this jungle-flower bright.
Paris and London, World-Flowers twain
Wherewith the World-Tree blooms again,
Since Time hath gathered Babylon,
And withered Rome still withers on.
Sidon and Tyre were such as ye,
How bright they shone upon the tree!
But Time hath gathered, both are gone,
And no man sails to Babylon.
One asked of regret,
And I made reply:
To have held the bird,
And let it fly;
To have seen the star
For a moment nigh,
And lost it
Through a slothful eye;
To have plucked the flower
And cast it by;
To have one only hope--
To die.
_Lionel Johnson_
Born in 1867, Lionel Johnson received a classical education at Oxford,
and his poetry is a faithful reflection of his studies in Greek and
Latin literatures. Though he allied himself with the modern Irish
poets, his Celtic origin is a literary myth; Johnson, having been
converted to Catholicism in 1891, became imbued with Catholic and,
later, with Irish traditions. His verse, while sometimes strained and
over-decorated, is chastely designed, rich and, like that of the
Cavalier poets of the seventeenth century, mystically devotional.
_Poems_ (1895) contains his best work. Johnson died in 1902.
Go from me: I am one of those who fall.
What! hath no cold wind swept your heart at all,
In my sad company? Before the end,
Go from me, dear my friend!
Yours are the victories of light: your feet
Rest from good toil, where rest is brave and sweet:
But after warfare in a mourning gloom,
I rest in clouds of doom.
Have you not read so, looking in these eyes?
Is it the common light of the pure skies,
Lights up their shadowy depths? The end is set:
Though the end be not yet.
When gracious music stirs, and all is bright,
And beauty triumphs through a courtly night;
When I too joy, a man like other men:
Yet, am I like them, then?
And in the battle, when the horsemen sweep
Against a thousand deaths, and fall on sleep:
Who ever sought that sudden calm, if I
Sought not? yet could not die!
Seek with thine eyes to pierce this crystal sphere:
Canst read a fate there, prosperous and clear?
Only the mists, only the weeping clouds,
Dimness and airy shrouds.
Beneath, what angels are at work? What powers
Prepare the secret of the fatal hours?
See! the mists tremble, and the clouds are stirred:
When comes the calling word?
The clouds are breaking from the crystal ball,
Breaking and clearing: and I look to fall.
When the cold winds and airs of portent sweep,
My spirit may have sleep.
O rich and sounding voices of the air!
Interpreters and prophets of despair:
Priests of a fearful sacrament! I come,
To make with you mine home.
The mountains, and the lonely death at last
Upon the lonely mountains: O strong friend!
The wandering over, and the labour passed,
Thou art indeed at rest:
Earth gave thee of her best,
That labour and this end.
Earth was thy mother, and her true son thou:
Earth called thee to a knowledge of her ways,
Upon the great hills, up the great streams: now
Upon earth's kindly breast
Thou art indeed at rest:
Thou, and thine arduous days.
Fare thee well, O strong heart! The tranquil night
Looks calmly on thee: and the sun pours down
His glory over thee, O heart of might!
Earth gives thee perfect rest:
Earth, whom thy swift feet pressed:
Earth, whom the vast stars crown.
_Ernest Dowson_
Ernest Dowson was born at Belmont Hill in Kent in 1867. His
great-uncle was Alfred Domett (Browning's "Waring"), who was at one
time Prime Minister of New Zealand. Dowson, practically an invalid all
his life, was reckless with himself and, as disease weakened him more
and more, hid himself in miserable surroundings; for almost two years
he lived in sordid supper-houses known as "cabmen's shelters." He
literally drank himself to death.
His delicate and fantastic poetry was an attempt to escape from a
reality too big and brutal for him. His passionate lyric, "I have been
faithful to thee, Cynara! in my fashion," a triumph of despair and
disillusion, is an outburst in which Dowson epitomized himself--"One
of the greatest lyrical poems of our time," writes Arthur Symons, "in
it he has for once said everything, and he has said it to an
intoxicating and perhaps immortal music."
Dowson died obscure in 1900, one of the finest of modern minor poets.
His life was the tragedy of a weak nature buffeted by a strong and
merciless environment.
With delicate, mad hands, behind his sordid bars,
Surely he hath his posies, which they tear and twine;
Those scentless wisps of straw that, miserable, line
His strait, caged universe, whereat the dull world stares.
Pedant and pitiful. O, how his rapt gaze wars
With their stupidity! Know they what dreams divine
Lift his long, laughing reveries like enchanted wine,
And make his melancholy germane to the stars'?
O lamentable brother! if those pity thee,
Am I not fain of all thy lone eyes promise me;
Half a fool's kingdom, far from men who sow and reap,
All their days, vanity? Better than mortal flowers,
Thy moon-kissed roses seem: better than love or sleep,
The star-crowned solitude of thine oblivious hours!
You would have understood me, had you waited;
I could have loved you, dear! as well as he:
Had we not been impatient, dear! and fated
Always to disagree.
What is the use of speech? Silence were fitter:
Lest we should still be wishing things unsaid.
Though all the words we ever spake were bitter,
Shall I reproach you, dead?
Nay, let this earth, your portion, likewise cover
All the old anger, setting us apart:
Always, in all, in truth was I your lover;
Always, I held your heart.
I have met other women who were tender,
As you were cold, dear! with a grace as rare.
Think you, I turned to them, or made surrender,
I who had found you fair?
Had we been patient, dear! ah, had you waited,
I had fought death for you, better than he:
But from the very first, dear! we were fated
Always to disagree.
Late, late, I come to you, now death discloses
Love that in life was not to be our part:
On your low lying mound between the roses,
Sadly I cast my heart.
I would not waken you: nay! this is fitter;
Death and the darkness give you unto me;
Here we who loved so, were so cold and bitter,
Hardly can disagree.
(_George William Russell_)
At Durgan, a tiny town in the north of Ireland, George William Russell
was born in 1867. He moved to Dublin when he was 10 years old and, as
a young man, helped to form the group that gave rise to the Irish
Renascence--the group of which William Butler Yeats, Doctor Douglas
Hyde, Katharine Tynan and Lady Gregory were brilliant members. Besides
being a splendid mystical poet, "A. E." is a painter of note, a fiery
patriot, a distinguished sociologist, a public speaker, a student of
economics and one of the heads of the Irish Agricultural Association.
The best of his poetry is in _Homeward Songs by the Way_ (1894) and
_The Earth Breath and Other Poems_. Yeats has spoken of these poems as
"revealing in all things a kind of scented flame consuming them from
within."
Its edges foamed with amethyst and rose,
Withers once more the old blue flower of day:
There where the ether like a diamond glows,
Its petals fade away.
A shadowy tumult stirs the dusky air;
Sparkle the delicate dews, the distant snows;
The great deep thrills--for through it everywhere
The breath of Beauty blows.
I saw how all the trembling ages past,
Moulded to her by deep and deeper breath,
Near'd to the hour when Beauty breathes her last
And knows herself in death.
Far up the dim twilight fluttered
Moth-wings of vapour and flame:
The lights danced over the mountains,
Star after star they came.
The lights grew thicker unheeded,
For silent and still were we;
Our hearts were drunk with a beauty
Our eyes could never see.
_Stephen Phillips_
Born in 1868, Stephen Phillips is best known as the author of _Herod_
(1900), _Paola and Francesca_ (1899), and _Ulysses_ (1902); a poetic
playwright who succeeded in reviving, for a brief interval, the blank
verse drama on the modern stage. Hailed at first with extravagant and
almost incredible praise, Phillips lived to see his most popular
dramas discarded and his new ones, such as _Pietro of Siena_ (1910),
unproduced and unnoticed.
Phillips failed to "restore" poetic drama because he was, first of
all, a lyric rather than a dramatic poet. In spite of certain moments
of rhetorical splendor, his scenes are spectacular instead of
emotional; his inspiration is too often derived from other models. He
died in 1915.
_Herod speaks_:
I dreamed last night of a dome of beaten gold
To be a counter-glory to the Sun.
There shall the eagle blindly dash himself,
There the first beam shall strike, and there the moon
Shall aim all night her argent archery;
And it shall be the tryst of sundered stars,
The haunt of dead and dreaming Solomon;
Shall send a light upon the lost in Hell,
And flashings upon faces without hope.--
And I will think in gold and dream in silver,
Imagine in marble and conceive in bronze,
Till it shall dazzle pilgrim nations
And stammering tribes from undiscovered lands,
Allure the living God out of the bliss,
And all the streaming seraphim from heaven.
Beautiful lie the dead;
Clear comes each feature;
Satisfied not to be,
Strangely contented.
Like ships, the anchor dropped,
Furled every sail is;
Mirrored with all their masts
In a deep water.
My dead love came to me, and said:
'God gives me one hour's rest,
To spend with thee on earth again:
How shall we spend it best?'
'Why, as of old,' I said; and so
We quarrelled, as of old:
But, when I turned to make my peace,
That one short hour was told.
_Laurence Binyon_
Laurence Binyon was born at Lancaster, August 10, 1869, a cousin of
Stephen Phillips; in _Primavera_ (1890) their early poems appeared
together. Binyon's subsequent volumes showed little distinction until
he published _London Visions_, which, in an enlarged edition in 1908,
revealed a gift of characterization and a turn of speech in surprising
contrast to his previous academic _Lyrical Poems_ (1894). His _Odes_
(1901) contains his ripest work; two poems in particular, "The
Threshold" and "The Bacchanal of Alexander," are glowing and unusually
spontaneous.
Binyon's power has continued to grow; age has given his verse a new
sharpness. "The House That Was," one of his most recent poems,
appeared in _The London Mercury_, November, 1919.
For Mercy, Courage, Kindness, Mirth,
There is no measure upon earth.
Nay, they wither, root and stem,
If an end be set to them.
Overbrim and overflow,
If your own heart you would know;
For the spirit born to bless
Lives but in its own excess.
Of the old house, only a few crumbled
Courses of brick, smothered in nettle and dock,
Or a squared stone, lying mossy where it tumbled!
Sprawling bramble and saucy thistle mock
What once was firelit floor and private charm
Where, seen in a windowed picture, hills were fading
At dusk, and all was memory-coloured and warm,
And voices talked, secure from the wind's invading.
Of the old garden, only a stray shining
Of daffodil flames amid April's cuckoo-flowers,
Or a cluster of aconite mixt with weeds entwining!
But, dark and lofty, a royal cedar towers
By homely thorns: whether the white rain drifts
Or sun scorches, he holds the downs in ken,
The western vale; his branchy tiers he lifts,
Older than many a generation of men.
_Alfred Douglas_
Lord Alfred Douglas was born in 1870 and educated at Magdalen College,
Oxford. He was the editor of _The Academy_ from 1907 to 1910 and was
at one time the intimate friend of Oscar Wilde. One of the minor
poets of "the eighteen-nineties," several of his poems rise above his
own affectations and the end-of-the-century decadence. _The City of
the Soul_ (1899) and _Sonnets_ (1900) contain his most graceful
writing.
I know a green grass path that leaves the field
And, like a running river, winds along
Into a leafy wood, where is no throng
Of birds at noon-day; and no soft throats yield
Their music to the moon. The place is sealed,
An unclaimed sovereignty of voiceless song,
And all the unravished silences belong
To some sweet singer lost, or unrevealed.
So is my soul become a silent place....
Oh, may I wake from this uneasy night
To find some voice of music manifold.
Let it be shape of sorrow with wan face,
Or love that swoons on sleep, or else delight
That is as wide-eyed as a marigold.
_T. Sturge Moore_
Thomas Sturge Moore was born March 4, 1870. He is well known not only
as an author, but as a critic and wood-engraver. As an artist, he has
achieved no little distinction and has designed the covers for the
poetry of W. B. Yeats and others. As a poet, the greater portion of
his verse is severely classical in tone, academic in expression but,
of its kind, distinctive and intimate. Among his many volumes, the
most outstanding are _The Vinedresser and Other Poems_ (1899), _A
Sicilian Idyll_ (1911) and _The Sea Is Kind_ (1914).
O silver-throated Swan
Struck, struck! A golden dart
Clean through thy breast has gone
Home to thy heart.
Thrill, thrill, O silver throat!
O silver trumpet, pour
Love for defiance back
On him who smote!
And brim, brim o'er
With love; and ruby-dye thy track
Down thy last living reach
Of river, sail the golden light--
Enter the sun's heart--even teach
O wondrous-gifted Pain, teach Thou
The God of love, let him learn how!
So faint, no ear is sure it hears,
So faint and far;
So vast that very near appears
My voice, both here and in each star
Unmeasured leagues do bridge between;
Like that which on a face is seen
Where secrets are;
Sweeping, like veils of lofty balm,
Tresses unbound
O'er desert sand, o'er ocean calm,
I am wherever is not sound;
And, goddess of the truthful face,
My beauty doth instil its grace
That joy abound.
_William H. Davies_
According to his own biography, William H. Davies was born in a
public-house called Church House at Newport, in the County of
Monmouthshire, April 20, 1870, of Welsh parents. He was, until Bernard
Shaw "discovered" him, a cattleman, a berry-picker, a panhandler--in
short, a vagabond. In a preface to Davies' second book, _The
Autobiography of a Super-Tramp_ (1906), Shaw describes how the
manuscript came into his hands:
"In the year 1905 I received by post a volume of poems by one William
H. Davies, whose address was The Farm House, Kensington, S. E. I was
surprised to learn that there was still a farmhouse left in
Kensington; for I did not then suspect that the Farm House, like the
Shepherdess Walks and Nightingale Lane and Whetstone Parks of Bethnal
Green and Holborn, is so called nowadays in irony, and is, in fact, a
doss-house, or hostelry, where single men can have a night's lodging,
for, at most, sixpence.... The author, as far as I could guess, had
walked into a printer's or stationer's shop; handed in his manuscript;
and ordered his book as he might have ordered a pair of boots. It was
marked 'price, half a crown.' An accompanying letter asked me very
civilly if I required a half-crown book of verses; and if so, would I
please send the author the half crown: if not, would I return the
book. This was attractively simple and sensible. I opened the book,
and was more puzzled than ever; for before I had read three lines I
perceived that the author was a real poet. His work was not in the
least strenuous or modern; there was indeed no sign of his ever having
read anything otherwise than as a child reads.... Here, I saw, was a
genuine innocent, writing odds and ends of verse about odds and ends
of things; living quite out of the world in which such things are
usually done, and knowing no better (or rather no worse) than to get
his book made by the appropriate craftsman and hawk it round like any
other ware."
It is more than likely that Davies' first notoriety as a tramp-poet
who had ridden the rails in the United States and had had his right
foot cut off by a train in Canada, obscured his merits as a genuine
singer. Even his early _The Soul's Destroyer_ (1907) revealed that
simplicity which is as _naif_ as it is strange. The volumes that
followed are more clearly melodious, more like the visionary wonder of
Blake, more artistically artless.
With the exception of "The Villain," which has not yet appeared in
book form, the following poems are taken from _The Collected Poems of
W. H. Davies_ (1916) with the permission of the publisher, Alfred A.
Knopf.
When primroses are out in Spring,
And small, blue violets come between;
When merry birds sing on boughs green,
And rills, as soon as born, must sing;
When butterflies will make side-leaps,
As though escaped from Nature's hand
Ere perfect quite; and bees will stand
Upon their heads in fragrant deeps;
When small clouds are so silvery white
Each seems a broken rimmed moon--
When such things are, this world too soon,
For me, doth wear the veil of Night.
Thy beauty haunts me heart and soul,
Oh, thou fair Moon, so close and bright;
Thy beauty makes me like the child
That cries aloud to own thy light:
The little child that lifts each arm
To press thee to her bosom warm.
Though there are birds that sing this night
With thy white beams across their throats,
Let my deep silence speak for me
More than for them their sweetest notes:
Who worships thee till music fails,
Is greater than thy nightingales.
While joy gave clouds the light of stars,
That beamed where'er they looked;
And calves and lambs had tottering knees,
Excited, while they sucked;
While every bird enjoyed his song,
Without one thought of harm or wrong--
I turned my head and saw the wind,
Not far from where I stood,
Dragging the corn by her golden hair,
Into a dark and lonely wood.
Here's an example from
A Butterfly;
That on a rough, hard rock
Happy can lie;
Friendless and all alone
On this unsweetened stone.
Now let my bed be hard,
No care take I;
I'll make my joy like this
Small Butterfly;
Whose happy heart has power
To make a stone a flower.
_Hilaire Belloc_
Hilaire Belloc, who has been described as "a Frenchman, an Englishman,
an Oxford man, a country gentleman, a soldier, a satirist, a democrat,
a novelist, and a practical journalist," was born July 27, 1870. After
leaving school he served as a driver in the 8th Regiment of French
Artillery at Toul Meurthe-et-Moselle, being at that time a French
citizen. He was naturalized as a British subject somewhat later, and
in 1906 he entered the House of Commons as Liberal Member for South
Salford.
As an author, he has engaged in multiple activities. He has written
three satirical novels, one of which, _Mr. Clutterbuck's Election_,
sharply exposes British newspapers and underground politics. His _Path
to Rome_ (1902) is a high-spirited and ever-delightful travel book
which has passed through many editions. His historical studies and
biographies of _Robespierre_ and _Marie Antoinette_ (1909) are
classics of their kind. As a poet he is only somewhat less engaging.
His _Verses_ (1910) is a rather brief collection of poems on a wide
variety of themes. Although his humorous and burlesque stanzas are
refreshing, Belloc is most himself when he writes either of malt
liquor or his beloved Sussex. Though his religious poems are full of a
fine romanticism, "The South Country" is the most pictorial and
persuasive of his serious poems. His poetic as well as his spiritual
kinship with G. K. Chesterton is obvious.
When I am living in the Midlands
That are sodden and unkind,
I light my lamp in the evening:
My work is left behind;
And the great hills of the South Country
Come back into my mind.
The great hills of the South Country
They stand along the sea;
And it's there walking in the high woods
That I could wish to be,
And the men that were boys when I was a boy
Walking along with me.
The men that live in North England
I saw them for a day:
Their hearts are set upon the waste fells,
Their skies are fast and grey;
From their castle-walls a man may see
The mountains far away.
The men that live in West England
They see the Severn strong,
A-rolling on rough water brown
Light aspen leaves along.
They have the secret of the Rocks,
And the oldest kind of song.
But the men that live in the South Country
Are the kindest and most wise,
They get their laughter from the loud surf,
And the faith in their happy eyes
Comes surely from our Sister the Spring
When over the sea she flies;
The violets suddenly bloom at her feet,
She blesses us with surprise.
I never get between the pines
But I smell the Sussex air;
Nor I never come on a belt of sand
But my home is there.
And along the sky the line of the Downs
So noble and so bare.
A lost thing could I never find,
Nor a broken thing mend:
And I fear I shall be all alone
When I get towards the end.
Who will there be to comfort me
Or who will be my friend?
I will gather and carefully make my friends
Of the men of the Sussex Weald;
They watch the stars from silent folds,
They stiffly plough the field.
By them and the God of the South Country
My poor soul shall be healed.
If I ever become a rich man,
Or if ever I grow to be old,
I will build a house with deep thatch
To shelter me from the cold,
And there shall the Sussex songs be sung
And the story of Sussex told.
I will hold my house in the high wood
Within a walk of the sea,
And the men that were boys when I was a boy
Shall sit and drink with me.
_Anthony C. Deane_
Anthony C. Deane was born in 1870 and was the Seatonian prizeman in
Ennismore Gardens, since 1916. His long list of light verse and
essays includes several excellent parodies, the most delightful being
found in his _New Rhymes for Old_ (1901).
It was the good ship _Billycock_, with thirteen men aboard,
Athirst to grapple with their country's foes,--
A crew, 'twill be admitted, not numerically fitted
To navigate a battleship in prose.
It was the good ship _Billycock_ put out from Plymouth Sound,
While lustily the gallant heroes cheered,
And all the air was ringing with the merry bo'sun's singing,
Till in the gloom of night she disappeared.
But when the morning broke on her, behold, a dozen ships,
A dozen ships of France around her lay,
(Or, if that isn't plenty, I will gladly make it twenty),
And hemmed her close in Salamander Bay.
Then to the Lord High Admiral there spake a cabin-boy:
"Methinks," he said, "the odds are somewhat great,
And, in the present crisis, a cabin-boy's advice is
That you and France had better arbitrate!"
"Pooh!" said the Lord High Admiral, and slapped his manly chest,
"Pooh! That would be both cowardly and wrong;
Shall I, a gallant fighter, give the needy ballad-writer
No suitable material for song?"
"Nay--is the shorthand-writer here?--I tell you, one and all,
I mean to do my duty, as I ought;
With eager satisfaction let us clear the decks for action
And fight the craven Frenchmen!" So they fought.
And (after several stanzas which as yet are incomplete,
Describing all the fight in epic style)
When the _Billycock_ was going, she'd a dozen prizes towing
(Or twenty, as above) in single file!
Ah, long in glowing English hearts the story will remain,
The memory of that historic day,
And, while we rule the ocean, we will picture with emotion
The _Billycock_ in Salamander Bay!
_P.S._--I've lately noticed that the critics--who, I think,
In praising _my_ productions are remiss--
Quite easily are captured, and profess themselves enraptured,
By patriotic ditties such as this,
For making which you merely take some dauntless Englishmen,
Guns, heroism, slaughter, and a fleet--
Ingredients you mingle in a metre with a jingle,
And there you have your masterpiece complete!
Why, then, with labour infinite, produce a book of verse
To languish on the "All for Twopence" shelf?
The ballad bold and breezy comes particularly easy--
I mean to take to writing it myself!
Oh, I be vun of the useful troibe
O' rustic volk, I be;
And writin' gennelmen due descroibe
The doin's o' such as we;
I don't knaw mooch o' corliflower plants,
I can't tell 'oes from trowels,
But 'ear me mix ma consonants,
An' moodle oop all ma vowels!
I talks in a wunnerful dialect
That vew can hunderstand,
'Tis Yorkshire-Zummerzet, I expect,
With a dash o' the Oirish brand;
Sometimes a bloomin' flower of speech
I picks from Cockney spots,
And when releegious truths I teach,
Obsairve ma richt gude Scots!
In most of the bukes, 'twas once the case
I 'adn't got much to do,
I blessed the 'eroine's purty face,
An' I seed the 'ero through;
But now, I'm juist a pairsonage!
A power o' bukes there be
Which from the start to the very last page
Entoirely deal with me!
The wit or the point o' what I spakes
Ye've got to find if ye can;
A wunnerful difference spellin' makes
In the 'ands of a competent man!
I mayn't knaw mooch o' corliflower plants,
I mayn't knaw 'oes from trowels,
But I does ma wark, if ma consonants
Be properly mixed with ma vowels!
_J. M. Synge_
The most brilliant star of the Celtic revival was born at Rathfarnham,
near Dublin, in 1871. As a child in Wicklow, he was already fascinated
by the strange idioms and the rhythmic speech he heard there, a native
utterance which was his greatest delight and which was to be rich
material for his greatest work. He did not use this folk-language
merely as he heard it. He was an artist first and last, and as an
artist he bent and shaped the rough material, selecting with great
fastidiousness, so that in his plays every speech is, as he himself
declared all good speech should be, "as fully flavored as a nut or
apple." Even in _The Tinker's Wedding_ (1907), possibly the least
important of his plays, one is arrested by snatches like:
"That's a sweet tongue you have, Sarah Casey; but if sleep's
a grand thing, it's a grand thing to be waking up a day the
like of this, when there's a warm sun in it, and a kind air,
and you'll hear the cuckoos singing and crying out on the
top of the hill."
For some time, Synge's career was uncertain. He went to Germany half
intending to become a professional musician. There he studied the
theory of music, perfecting himself meanwhile in Gaelic and Hebrew,
winning prizes in both of these languages. Yeats found him in France
in 1898 and advised him to go to the Aran Islands, to live there as if
he were one of the people. "Express a life," said Yeats, "that has
never found expression." Synge went. He became part of the life of
Aran, living upon salt fish and eggs, talking Irish for the most part
but listening also to that beautiful English which, to quote Yeats
again, "has grown up in Irish-speaking districts and takes its
vocabulary from the time of Malory and of the translators of the
Bible, but its idiom and vivid metaphor from Irish." The result of
this close contact was five of the greatest poetic prose dramas not
only of his own generation, but of several generations preceding it.
(See Preface.)
In _Riders to the Sea_ (1903), _The Well of the Saints_ (1905), and
_The Playboy of the Western World_ (1907) we have a richness of
imagery, a new language startling in its vigor, a wildness and passion
that contrast strangely with the suave mysticism and delicate
spirituality of his associates in the Irish Theatre.
Synge's _Poems and Translations_ (1910), a volume which was not issued
until after his death, contains not only his few hard and earthy
verses, but also Synge's theory of poetry. The translations, which
have been rendered in a highly intensified prose, are as racy as
anything in his plays; his versions of Villon and Petrarch are
remarkable for their adherence to the original and still radiate the
poet's own personality.
Synge died, just as he was beginning to attain fame, at a private
hospital in Dublin March 24, 1909.
Bring Kateen-beug and Maurya Jude
And when the lads (they're in Dunquin)
Have sold their crabs and fish,
Wave fawny shawls and call them in,
And call the little girls who spin,
And seven weavers from Dunquin,
To dance in Beg-Innish.
I'll play you jigs, and Maurice Kean,
Where nets are laid to dry,
I've silken strings would draw a dance
From girls are lame or shy;
Four strings I've brought from Spain and France
To make your long men skip and prance,
Till stars look out to see the dance
Where nets are laid to dry.
We'll have no priest or peeler in
To dance in Beg-Innish;
But we'll have drink from M'riarty Jim
Rowed round while gannets fish,
A keg with porter to the brim,
That every lad may have his whim,
Till we up sails with M'riarty Jim
And sail from Beg-Innish.
(_He is Jealous of the Heavens and the Earth_)
What a grudge I am bearing the earth that has its arms about her, and
is holding that face away from me, where I was finding peace from
great sadness.
What a grudge I am bearing the Heavens that are after taking her, and
shutting her in with greediness, the Heavens that do push their bolt
against so many.
What a grudge I am bearing the blessed saints that have got her sweet
company, that I am always seeking; and what a grudge I am bearing
against Death, that is standing in her two eyes, and will not call me
with a word.
My arms are round you, and I lean
Against you, while the lark
Sings over us, and golden lights, and green
Shadows are on your bark.
There'll come a season when you'll stretch
Black boards to cover me;
Then in Mount Jerome I will lie, poor wretch,
With worms eternally.
_Nora Hopper Chesson_
Nora Hopper was born in Exeter on January 2, 1871, and married W. H.
Chesson, a well-known writer, in 1901. Although the Irish element in
her work is acquired and incidental, there is a distinct if somewhat
fitful race consciousness in _Ballads in Prose_ (1894) and _Under
Quickened Boughs_ (1896). She died suddenly April 14, 1906.
I will arise and go hence to the west,
And dig me a grave where the hill-winds call;
But O were I dead, were I dust, the fall
Of my own love's footstep would break my rest!
My heart in my bosom is black as a sloe!
I heed not cuckoo, nor wren, nor swallow:
Like a flying leaf in the sky's blue hollow
The heart in my breast is, that beats so low.
Because of the words your lips have spoken,
(O dear black head that I must not follow)
My heart is a grave that is stripped and hollow,
As ice on the water my heart is broken.
O lips forgetful and kindness fickle,
The swallow goes south with you: I go west
Where fields are empty and scythes at rest.
I am the poppy and you the sickle;
My heart is broken within my breast.
_Eva Gore-Booth_
Eva Gore-Booth, the second daughter of Sir Henry Gore-Booth and the
sister of Countess Marcievicz, was born in Sligo, Ireland, in 1872.
She first appeared in "A. E."'s anthology, _New Songs_, in which so
many of the modern Irish poets first came forward.
Her initial volume, _Poems_ (1898), showed practically no
distinction--not even the customary "promise." But _The One and the
Many_ (1904) and _The Sorrowful Princess_ (1907) revealed the gift of
the Celtic singer who is half mystic, half minstrel. Primarily
philosophic, her verse often turns to lyrics as haunting as the two
examples here reprinted.
The grand road from the mountain goes shining to the sea,
And there is traffic on it and many a horse and cart,
But the little roads of Cloonagh are dearer far to me
And the little roads of Cloonagh go rambling through my heart.
A great storm from the ocean goes shouting o'er the hill,
And there is glory in it; and terror on the wind:
But the haunted air of twilight is very strange and still,
And the little winds of twilight are dearer to my mind.
The great waves of the Atlantic sweep storming on their way,
Shining green and silver with the hidden herring shoal;
But the little waves of Breffny have drenched my heart in spray,
And the little waves of Breffny go stumbling through my soul.
Free to all souls the hidden beauty calls,
The sea thrift dwelling on her spray-swept height,
The lofty rose, the low-grown aconite,
The gliding river and the stream that brawls
Down the sharp cliffs with constant breaks and falls--
All these are equal in the equal light--
All waters mirror the one Infinite.
God made a garden, it was men built walls;
But the wide sea from men is wholly freed;
Freely the great waves rise and storm and break,
Nor softlier go for any landlord's need,
Where rhythmic tides flow for no miser's sake
And none hath profit of the brown sea-weed,
But all things give themselves, yet none may take.
_Moira O'Neill_
Moira O'Neill is known chiefly by a remarkable little collection of
only twenty-five lyrics, _Songs from the Glens of Antrim_ (1900),
simple tunes as unaffected as the peasants of whom she sings. The best
of her poetry is dramatic without being theatrical; melodious without
falling into the tinkle of most "popular" sentimental verse.
'_Where am I from?_' From the green hills of Erin.
'_Have I no song then?_' My songs are all sung.
'_What o' my love?_' 'Tis alone I am farin'.
Old grows my heart, an' my voice yet is young.
'_If she was tall?_' Like a king's own daughter.
'_If she was fair?_' Like a mornin' o' May.
When she'd come laughin' 'twas the runnin' wather,
When she'd come blushin' 'twas the break o' day.
'_Where did she dwell?_' Where one'st I had my dwellin'.
'_Who loved her best?_' There's no one now will know.
'_Where is she gone?_' Och, why would I be tellin'!
Where she is gone there I can never go.
_Youth's for an hour,
Beauty's a flower,
But love is the jewel that wins the world._
Youth's for an hour, an' the taste o' life is sweet,
Ailes was a girl that stepped on two bare feet;
In all my days I never seen the one as fair as she,
I'd have lost my life for Ailes, an' she never cared for me.
Beauty's a flower, an' the days o' life are long,
There's little knowin' who may live to sing another song;
For Ailes was the fairest, but another is my wife,
An' Mary--God be good to her!--is all I love in life.
_Youth's for an hour,
Beauty's a flower,
But love is the jewel that wins the world._
_John McCrae_
John McCrae was born in Guelph, Ontario, Canada, in 1872. He was
graduated in arts in 1894 and in medicine in 1898. He finished his
studies at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore and returned to Canada, joining
the staff of the Medical School of McGill University. He was a
lieutenant of artillery in South Africa (1899-1900) and was in charge
of the Medical Division of the McGill Canadian General Hospital during
the World War. After serving two years, he died of pneumonia, January,
Few who read the title poem of his book, possibly the most widely-read