librarians who helped on this project, Sam W. and the
_Illustrated Sketches and Poems
for Young People._
Our Young Folks at Home and Abroad.
There are two little girls living nearly a hundred rods apart, Mamie
and Fannie. Each had a nice pet cat.
Mamie's cat had three little kittens. When they were about three weeks
old their poor mother was killed by a useless dog. For two days Mamie
fed her kittens with a spoon, and did all she could to comfort them;
but they would cry for their mother.
Fannie's cat had only one kitten, and it died at once. Then Mamie took
her three motherless kittens down to Fannie's cat to see if she would
adopt them. She took them at once, and made a great fuss over them.
Then she was allowed to raise them.
When Mamie thought her kittens were old enough she took all three of
them home again. But their stepmother would neither eat nor drink. She
cried and looked for the kittens. At last Fannie carried her cat up to
Mamie's house to see the kittens. Then mother and kittens were all
happy again, and played together as if they had never been separated.
When the girls saw how much the cat and kittens were attached to each
other they concluded to take Fannie's cat home again with only two of
the kittens; in a short time bring back one of them, and later the
last one. In this way they thought they could separate them without
any trouble.
Fannie's cat was not pleased with this plan. She began to look for and
call the third kitten. The next morning, when Mamie went to feed her
one kitten, she could not find it anywhere about the barn or woodshed.
She went down to Fannie's house, and there she found her kitten.
Sometime in the night Fannie's cat went to Mamie's house, found the
kitten, and carried it home. Since that time the girls have not tried
to part the cat and kittens, and they are a happy family.
Many noble oak-trees are planted by the little squirrel. Running up
the branches, this little animal strips off the acorns, and buries
them in the ground for food in the cold weather; and when he goes to
hunt them up he does not find all of them. Those he leaves behind
often grow up into great and beautiful trees.
The nuthatch, too, among the birds, is a great planter. After
twisting off a cluster of beech-nuts this queer little bird carries
them to some favorite tree, and pegs them into the crevices of the
bark in a curious way. How, we cannot tell. After a while they fall to
the ground, and there grow into large trees.
Some larger animals are good seed-planters, and have sometimes covered
barren countries with trees. It is very singular that animals and
birds can do so much farm-work, isn't it?
I met a tearful little lass;
She sobbed so hard I could not pass,
I wondered so thereat;
"Oh, dry your tears, my pretty child,
Pray tell me why you grieve so wild."
"A--mouse--ate--up--my--cat!"
"A mouse ate up your cat!" I cried,
To think she'd fib quite horrified;
"Why, how can you say that?"
Her tears afresh began to run,
She sobbed the words out, one by one:
"It--was--a--candy--cat!"
Tippy was a little, black dog, and he lived at the engine-house, where
the great engines, which put out the fires, were kept.
He was a poor, miserable, little dog, without a home until the firemen
took pity on him and gave him one.
Dick was one of the horses that helped to pull the engine. He was very
large and black, with a white spot on his forehead. He and Tippy were
fine friends.
When it was cold the little dog would curl close down by Dick's back,
and sleep all night, as warm as could be.
One day, when it was Dick's dinner-time, and he was very hungry, Tippy
kept running into his stall and barking and biting at his heels.
Dick did not like it, and he wanted his dinner so much that it made
him cross. So he put down his head, took Tippy by the back of the
neck, and lifted him over the side of the low stall, as much as to
say:--
"If you won't go out I will put you out!"
Tippy soon grew to know what the engines were for, and when the
fire-bells rang, and the great horses came from their stalls ready to
be harnessed to the engine, he would bark and jump up and down, and
beg to go too.
One day he hid under the driver's seat, and the firemen did not see
him, so he went to the fire.
After that, the instant an alarm sounded, Tippy would spring on the
engine. As it dashed down the street, the bells ringing, the firemen
shouting, he would bark to let the people along the way know he was
going to help put out the fire.
Every day the firemen would give Tippy a basket, and a penny to buy a
bone with. He would take the basket in his mouth, and trot across the
street to the butcher's for the bone. The butcher would take the penny
out, and put a bone in its place, and Tippy would run home to eat his
breakfast.
Once in a while Tippy would be very naughty, and would have to be
punished. Then the firemen would make him sit on a chair for a long
while, until he would promise, by a bark which meant, "Yes," that he
would be good.
Tommy and Bessie, Bert, and even little Caddie, think there is no
treat like a visit to Covill Farm.
They all jumped for joy when, one bright afternoon in early summer,
their papa said:--
"I am going out past the Covill Farm, and if any little folks want to
go along they may stop there while I do my errands."
How soon they were all ready! How busy all the little tongues were,
talking over what they would see and do!
"There'll be lots of little chickens now; and ducklings, too!"
"Yes; and we'll see the dear little lambs, and the little calfeys!"
"And maybe we can go down to the boat-house, and have a row on the
lake!"
But they never dreamed of the funny sight they really saw that
afternoon. Papa set them all down at the gate, and drove on, promising
to come back for them in an hour.
When he came back he tied his horse, and set out to find the little
folks. But in a few moments they saw him, and came rushing across the
yard, all talking at once:--
"O papa, come! come and see!"
"Oh, so funny!"
Little two-year-old Caddie was as much excited as the rest; she
cried:--
"Take my hand, papa! Little piggies shall not bite you!"
"Little piggies," indeed! Little foxes they were; and nine of the
cunning creatures. Only think!
The manager of the farm said that something had been killing his
lambs, and he had been on the watch to find out the rascal.
One day, when he was out with his gun, he saw something moving near
an old woodchuck hole; at least, there had been woodchucks there the
year before.
He went nearer, expecting to see a woodchuck again; but there were
these little foxes playing around. The woodchucks must have burrowed
out, and an old fox taken possession of their hole for a den.
Mr. Nash lay down on the ground to count the funny little things, and
watch them tumbling over each other. Then he tried to stop up the
entrance to their den with his coat, so that he could catch them. But
a tree root lay across the hole in such a way that there was a place
left big enough for the little foxes to get in; and in they went.
Then Mr. Nash went and called a man to help him. They took spades and
dug into the hole until they found them.
They carried them up to the farm-yard, and put them into a pen. They
were of a tawny color; and when the children saw them they were about
as large as cats, and as full of play as any kittens.
Mr. Nash said he did not want to kill them, because they were so
cunning. But it was a good thing that he caught them. Just think how
many chickens, and ducks, and geese, and lambs those nine foxes might
have killed, if they had grown up in their den!
It was the first day of school after a vacation. The children were
playing in the yards. The teachers sat at their desks waiting for the
bell to strike to call the children to the different rooms. The hands
of the different clocks pointed to a quarter before nine.
The bell was a sort of gong, fastened to the outside of the building,
and the master of the school could ring it by touching a knob in the
wall near his desk. It was now time to call the children into school.
The master pulled the bell and waited. Still the merry shouts could be
heard in the school-yards. Very strange! The children were so engaged
in play that they could not hear the bell, he thought. Then he pulled
it more vigorously. Still the shouts and laughter continued.
The master raised his window, clapped his hands, and pointed to the
bell.
The children rushed into line like little soldiers, and waited for the
second signal. The teacher pulled and pulled, but there was no sound.
Then he sent a boy to tell each line to file in, and he sent another
boy for a carpenter to find out if the bell-cord was broken.
What do you think the carpenter found? A little sparrow had built its
nest inside the bell, and prevented the hammer striking against the
bell. The teacher told the children what the trouble was, and asked if
the nest should be taken out. There was a loud chorus of "No, sir."
Every day the four hundred children would gather in the yard and look
up at the nest. When the little birds were able to fly to the trees in
the yard, and no longer needed a nest, one of the boys climbed on a
ladder and cleared away the straw and hay so that the sound of the
bell might call the children from play.
The frosts in the door-yard maple
Had lighted a fine red blaze,
And one of the golden twilights
That come September days:
The neighborhood lads had gathered
To play their usual plays.
Frankie was good at planning,
And seeing the glowing tree,
"Let's have a fire department
And play 'tis a house!" said he.
"Oh, yes, a hook and ladder,"
Cried all; "what fun 'twill be!"
So they put the hose on the hydrant.
Searched everywhere about
Until they found a ladder,
And then, with yell and shout
Of "fire" and clang of "ding-dong,"
They rushed to put it out.
The hosemen pulled their jackets
Hastily from their backs;
One climbed the tree like a squirrel,
With a ball-bat for an axe
And he hewed at the beautiful branches
With frantic hacks and whacks.
Some one turned on the water,
And the boy in the foremost place
Got the full force from the nozzle
Square in his little face;
And he cried for half a minute
With the funniest grimace.
The stream flew this way, that way,
And up to the tree's bright top,
And back came the water splashing
With reckless slosh and slop,
And with it showers of red leaves
And twigs began to drop.
This small boys' Hook and Ladder
Was a very good company,
And they squirted till the sidewalk
Was like a mimic sea;
But they didn't put out the fire
In the old red maple-tree.
"Good Billy! nice Billy!" said little Joe, as he patted the nose of
the old black horse. "Say, Uncle John, can't I ride him to water?"
"I am afraid you cannot hang on to him," replied his uncle. "Did you
ever ride a horse?"
"No, uncle; but I am sure I can," answered Joe. "Please let me try.
I'll take hold of his mane with both hands, and hang on as hard as
ever I can."
"Well, you may try it. There is the trough, against that fence, the
other side of the barn. Look out that old Billy does not give you a
ducking."
"Never fear for me," cried Joe, riding away in great glee.
He was a little city boy, and had come out to the farm to make his
uncle a visit. He thought it great fun to take a ride on horseback.
It did not take him long to find the trough, for old Billy knew the
way right well. Then, how it happened, Joe never could tell: Billy put
his head down quite suddenly, and right over it slid the little boy
with a great splash, head first into the water.
Of course he was not hurt. He caught hold of the fence and came out,
dripping from head to foot.
Old Billy looked on rather surprised, but got his drink. He let Joe
lead him back to the barn, and how Uncle John did laugh at him. Joe
laughed too, as he went off to get on some dry clothes. Though he took
a good many rides after that, he never forgot his first one on old
Billy's back.
When Harry was six years old his grandfather sent him a very nice
present from the farm. You cannot guess what it was, so I will tell
you.
A goat, with a harness and cart, for Harry to drive him. Harry named
him Gypsy, because he was so black.
Gypsy and Harry had a great many good times together. He would draw
Harry to school and then wait very patiently under the shade of a tree
until school was out. All the school-children were very fond of him
and would bring him sweet apples and cake.
The teacher was fond of Gypsy, too, and would often bring sugar to
him; but she never let Gypsy have it until he had performed one of the
tricks the boys had taught him. He must either stand on his head, bow,
or dance. Gypsy could do all these.
One day Gypsy did something very funny. It was a very hot day, and
Harry thought he would unharness him and let him roam around the
school-yard.
What do you think Gypsy did? He walked into the school-house, straight
up to the teacher, and stood on his head. He was begging for sugar.
The teacher laughed with the scholars, and said, "Gypsy, you have
learned your lesson well; now I'll excuse you, and let you go out to
play." And then she drove him out.
One of the boys begged leave to give Gypsy an apple, and the teacher
said he might. Gypsy took the apple in his mouth and made a little
bow.
The scholars laughed so long that the teacher had to close the door
for fear Gypsy would do some other funny thing.
If I could choose a wedding gift,
I'd climb for you the rainbow stairs
And bring a star to bless
This day of happiness.
As I came down, a bird I'd lift
From off his nest, that his sweet airs
And songs might you delight
From rosy morn till night.
But rainbow stairs are hard to mount,
The birds hide in the trees' green shade,
And so I bring, dear friend, to you
The flowers wet with dew.
Take them, and then take me; please count
My eyes your stars; the little maid
Who offers flowers, your bird,
Whose heart with love is stirred.
May child love and the birds together
Make all your life like summer weather;
May flowers blossom in your sight,
And golden stars bring peace at night.
"Well met, my little man!
Now tell me, if you can,
The very nicest way
To spend this long, dull day."
"Well, sir, my mother says,
Of all the pretty ways
To make a dark day bright
The best is just do right!"
"Shake hands, Prince!"
Black as a coal, and curly, too.
Is the dog I introduce to you.
He gives at once his right-hand paw,
None a softer one ever saw.
"Beg, Prince!"
Up he rises on his hind legs,
Flies both little fore-feet, and begs,
Not for money, nor food, nor clothes,
But merely to show how much he knows.
"Speak, Prince!"
You'd think from that first growling note,
He'd a bumble-bee inside his throat;
'Tis not a bee, but only a bark;
For answer, shrill and eager, hark!
"Roll over, Prince!"
He'll do all other things you ask;
But this is a task, a dreadful task.
He hates the dust on his silky hide
And in the fringe of his ears beside.
"Roll over, I say!"
Such a struggle as he goes through;
He wants to do it, and don't want to!
He rubs one black ear on the floor,
Rubs a little, and nothing more.
"Ah, Prince! Ah, Prince!"
Do you call that minding? Yet, I find
Yours is a common way to mind:
Willing to do what you like to best,
And only half-way doing the rest.
Little Fred went to spend his long vacation with his grandpa and
grandma in the country. Fred's grandpa had an old white horse named
Betsy. He had owned her ever since mamma was a little girl, and Fred
and Betsy soon became great friends.
Every day grandma would give Fred two biscuits, two apples and two
lumps of sugar in a little basket and he would take them over to the
pasture. Betsy soon learned to expect him, and waited for him at the
bars. She knew that half of what was in the basket was meant for her.
A very pretty path came in at one end of the pasture. Fred often
wondered where it went, but he never dared to go in very far alone.
One day his two cousins, Alice and Frank, came to make grandma a
little visit. Grandma told Fred he must show them all over the farm.
The next morning, after he had taken them out to lunch with Betsy, he
thought it would be a good chance to go down the little path. Alice
and Frank said they would like to go very much. Fred was still a
little afraid, and kept very near Alice. But he forgot everything
else, when, at the end of the path, they came upon a lovely little
pond. It was all covered with great white lilies and their green pads.
They wanted to get some lilies to take home. They tried to reach them
from the bank, but lilies have a provoking way of growing just out of
reach. Then they tried to hook them in with sticks, but got only three
or four, without stems. Then they looked for a board to use as a raft.
At last Frank said they must wade for them. He and Fred took off their
shoes and stockings, pulled up their trousers, and went in. Fred used
a long stick to feel the way before him, so as not to get into water
too deep.
This time they were successful, and got just as many lilies as their
hands would hold.
Grandma was delighted with them; she said she had not had any lilies
from that old pond since grandpa used to bring them to her years and
years before.
"You dear old Mother Nature, I am writing you a letter,
To let you know you ought to fix up things a little better.
The best of us will make mistakes--I thought perhaps if I
Should tell you how you might improve, you would be glad to try.
"I think you have forgotten, ma'am, that little girls and boys
Are fond of dolls, and tops, and sleds, and balls, and other toys;
Why didn't you--I wonder, now!--just take it in your head
To have such things all growing in a lovely garden bed?
"And then I should have planted (if it only had been me)
Some vines with little pickles, and a great big cooky tree;
And trees, besides, with gum-drops and caramels and things;
And lemonade should bubble up in all the little springs.
"I'd like to have the coasting and the skating in July,
When old Jack Frost would never get a single chance to try
To nip our cheeks and noses; and the Christmas trees should stand
By dozens, loaded!--in the woods!--now, wouldn't that be grand?
"Ah! what a world it would have been! How could you, madam, make
Such lots of bread and butter to so very little cake?
I'd have it just the other way, and every one would see
How very, very, very, very nice my way would be.
"But, as I cannot do it, will you think of what I say?
And please, ma'am, _do_ begin and alter things this very day.
And one thing more--on Saturdays don't send us any rain.
Good-by. If I should think of something else, I'll write again."
Out in the woods we went to-day:
Mamma and Nannie, Freddie and May,
Charlie and I, and good old Tray,
Out in the greenwood to romp and play.
To-day, you know, is the first of May;
And we meant to be so jolly and gay:
And celebrate in so merry a way
That we could never forget this holiday.
So first we chose the loveliest queen,
The dearest and sweetest that ever was seen;
For mamma herself was Her Highness Serene,
And we crowned her with rosebuds and evergreen.
Then we kneeled around and vowed to obey
All the laws she made, not only to-day,
But all the year through. Then she waved a spray
Of lilac bloom, and bade us all be gay.
Oh the games we played, and the races we run!
The bars we leaped, and the prizes we won!
Oh the shouting, the singing, the laughter and fun,--
It were hard to tell who was the happiest one!
Then, rosy and tired, we gathered around
Our beautiful queen on the mossy ground;
The hungriest group in the land, I'll be bound.
As the sandwiches, cookies, and tarts went round.
When the sun was low and shadows were gray,
Down from her throne stepped our fair Queen of May,
And through the green fields led homeward our way,
While we gave her sweet thanks for this beautiful day.
"Tell me a story about a bear,
A great big bear who lived in a wood
And ate little children." "O, my dear,
The bears I know of were playful and good,
And lived in houses or parks or a pen,
And never ate children, or boys, or men.
"There was one snow white, a mother bear,--
With two little babies cunning and queer;
Who rolled and climbed and stood on their heads,
And fell over, as boys often do, I fear.
They hugged their mother, and talked in their way,
And kept still when they'd nothing to do or say."
"No, I mean a real bear out in the woods,
Who growls and chases you, makes you run,
Half scared to death,--and a little boy lost
Out in the woods and the night coming on;
And the terrible bear with his great fierce eyes,
And no one to hear the little child's cries!
"He runs and runs,"--and then Bertie smiles,
His climax reached,--"I was only in fun;
The bear didn't kill him, because, you see,
There was just behind a man with a gun,
And he shot! Bang! Down came the old bear;
'Twas his own little boy and he saved him--there!"
"O, I am so glad!" and I give him a kiss;
Then silent we sit for a moment or two.
"That's a boy's story; yours, you know,
For nice little girls very well will do.
But boys, you remember, grow up to be men,
And can fight the bears to their very den."
Every animal has an instrument of defence. Some have claws, some
hoofs, some spurs and beaks, some powerful teeth and stings.
The porcupine has something queerer than all these. Its body is
covered all over with two sets of quills. One set is long, slender,
and curved; the other, short and straight, very stout, and with sharp
points.
Whenever the porcupine is chased by any animal, and finds he cannot
get out of the way, he just stops and bristles up all his quills. Then
he backs quickly upon the animal, so that the short, sharp quills may
stick into the body. If any happen to be a little loose, they stick so
fast in the flesh, like an arrow, that they often make a very bad
wound. Remember this whenever you come in the way of the porcupine.
I was watching Willie and Grouse at play on the lawn a few days since.
I saw in the poor dumb brute a spirit that is too seldom found in man.
Grouse is an old bird-dog,--a setter. He was bought before Willie came
to be his little master. He has soft, brown hair, and is a very
clever, good-natured dog. Willie can do anything with him, and he
never gets angry; but when Willie hurts him he only looks up and
pleads with his large, misty eyes.
They had been playing a long while. Grouse got tired and lay down on
the grass. Pretty soon I saw Willie get some water in a basin. I
wondered what he was going to do with it. Then he walked close up to
Grouse, who lay on the lawn, and threw the water all over him.
It was very unkind for Willie to do so, don't you think it was? I
called Willie to me, and told him it was too bad for him to plague
such a good old dog. I told him he was a very naughty boy to do so.
Willie said he supposed it was wrong to plague Grouse, but he didn't
mean to hurt him much.
So Willie went back to where Grouse lay in the sun drying himself. He
patted the poor dog on the head, and asked him if he would forgive him
for his unkindness.
Then Grouse, as if he knew what was said, licked Willie's hand. He
looked up forgivingly into his face with his dewy eyes, as much as to
say, "I am one who can love his enemies."
More than two thousand years ago, in a far-off country, a prince was
born. While he was yet a child every care was taken that he should be
made happy, and sights of sorrow were carefully kept from him. He was
of a very kind, loving, and tender disposition.
But the care even of a king for a prince could not keep away all
sorrowful sights. His watchful eyes sometimes saw suffering that
filled his heart with pity.
As he was playing with his cousin in the palace ground, a flock of
wild swans flew over their heads. His cousin drew his bow and wounded
one. It fell at his feet. The prince with pity drew the arrow from the
wounded bird, nursed it, and saved its life.
While his child life was one of tenderness and mercy, the years passed
by and he became a man. His heart was still filled with pity for every
suffering creature. He went from the palace, from home and dear
friends, to become poor and a wanderer, that he might help the
suffering. It is beautifully told that in his wanderings he came upon
a flock of sheep driven along the dusty highway. There was one poor
wounded, bleeding lamb, which he took tenderly in his arms and
carried. And so through life his pity and his help were given to the
weak, whether men or beasts. From his tender and beautiful life, men
came to worship him after his death.
The prince was Prince Gautama, of India, who is worshipped as Buddha.
Is not his loving and merciful life, from a little child to an old
man, a beautiful example to us?
"O George, the circus is coming! the handbills are all up, and such
pictures of horses and lions and tigers, and everything!"
Ned jumped about for joy, until George said,--
"But how are you going, Ned? We have no money, and papa said he could
not give us any more this month, if he gave us a gun."
"The new gun,--so he did," said Ned, sadly. "But the circus takes so
little; they would let us in at half price."
"I will tell you," exclaimed George; "let us sell our white Leghorns
to mamma. She wants them, I know, and the money we get for them will
take us both to the circus."
This was settled, and at dinner mamma was told of the plan.
"Put them up in the hen-house to-night," she said, "and to-morrow I
will look at them and we will fix the price."
The boys went to bed early that night, but had hardly settled
themselves to sleep when Melissa, the little servant-girl, rushed in
with a light in her hand.
"O, git up, boys, git up! Sompen's in de hen-house, killin' all de
fowls."
They jumped up and huddled on their clothes as fast as they could,
then ran after Melissa, who held the light while they armed themselves
with sticks.
There was a great stir, sure enough, in the hen-house,--fowls were
cackling and screaming with fright, and a curious snapping sound came
from one corner. When the light fell here they saw a rough, hairy
little animal, with small bright eyes like a pig, and a long smooth
tail. But, worst of all, one of the beautiful white Leghorns lay
before it, all mangled and bleeding. The horrid creature was tearing
its soft body, and would hardly stop eating when the children attacked
him.
At last Melissa caught up a stick, and killed the little beast with a
quick blow. She held it up in triumph by its long tail. It looked
very much like a little pig, and had five fingers, like toes, on each
foot.
"'Tis a 'possum," said Melissa, "and very good to eat. I's right glad
_I_ kill it, cos now 'tis mine."
"You are welcome to it," said Ned, half crying. "What shall we do now
our pretty Leghorn rooster is dead? We can't go to the circus."
Next morning they told their tale at the breakfast-table.
"Never mind," said their father; "I think you may go, after all, as I
owe you something for killing the opossum. He would have destroyed the
rest of the fowls."
"Yes; but, papa, Melissa killed it; we only struck at it."
"Well, I think I must treat the whole party, as all did their best. We
will set a trap to-day for the next opossum that may come to see us."
The boys and Melissa went to the circus, and enjoyed all they saw, and
Melissa had a fine opossum stew into the bargain.
Roy had fished in the ditch by the side of the road a great many
times; but he had only a bent pin for a fish-hook, and a piece of
twine for a line. He never caught any fish there.
When he was six years old his uncle James gave him a real fish-hook
and a line, and after a good deal of coaxing his mother said that he
might go down the cow-path to the brook and fish for trout.
Uncle James caught a great many trout in the brook.
Alice wanted to go with Roy; and Roy, who is very kind to his sister,
asked his mother to let her go.
Alice carried the basket,--a pretty large one. Mary, the cook, told
them to be sure and get it full of fish, so that she could fry them
for dinner.
How proud and happy they were! Their mother could see them from the
window all the time.
When they reached the brook Alice sat down on a rock. Roy put a worm
on the hook, and dropped the end of the line into the stream. But it
was a long time before he got a bite. At last he thought he felt a
nibble.
"I've got one, Ally!" he shouted. "O, such a big fellow! You will have
to come and help me pull him out!"
They tugged away on the line, and then they both fell over backwards.
"There he is!" cried Roy. But when they got up and looked, it was not
a trout at all. It was only a piece of a black root that broke off and
gave them a tumble.
Roy tried again, and after a good while he felt another nibble. He
jerked the line out so quickly that the hook caught in the back of
Alice's dress. It pricked her shoulder so that she had half a mind to
cry.
Roy could not get the hook out of her dress, and they went home for
their mother to help them.
Mary laughed at Roy a good deal. She told his uncle James, at
dinner-time, that Roy caught the biggest trout she ever saw, and he
had to come home for his mother to get it off the hook.
"I know a new bear-story,"
I said to the little folks,
Who surely as the twilight falls,
Begin to tease and coax.
"And did they live in the forest,
In a den all deep and dark?
And were there three?"--"Yes, three," I said,
"But they lived in the park.
"Let's see! Old Jack, the grizzly,
With great white claws, was there;
And a mother bear with thick brown coat,
And Betty, the little bear!
"And Silver-Locks went strolling
One day, in that pretty wood,
With Ninny, the nurse, and all at once
They came where the bears' house stood.
"And without so much as knocking
To see who was at home,
She cried out in a happy voice,
'Old Grizzly, here I come!'
"And thereupon old Grizzly
Began to gaze about;
And the mother bear sniffed at the bars,
And the baby bear peeped out.
"And they thought she must be a fairy,
Though, instead of a golden wand,
She carried a five-cent paper bag
Of peanuts in her hand.
"Old Grizzly his red mouth opened
As though they tasted good;
And the brown bear opened her red mouth
To catch one when she could;
"And Betty, the greedy baby,
Followed the big bears' style,
And held her little fire-red mouth,
Wide open all the while.
"And Silver-Locks laughed delighted,
And thought it wondrous fun,
And fed them peanuts from the bag
Till she hadn't another one.
"And is that all?" sighed Gold-Locks.
"Pshaw, is that all?" cried Ted.
"No--one thing more! 'Tis quite, quite time
That little folks were in bed!"
O--oh! O--oh!
Here we go,
Now so high,
Now so low;
Soon, soon,
We'll reach the moon;
Hear us sing,
See us swing,
Up in the old oak-tree.
O--oh! O--oh!
To and fro,
Like the birds,
High and low;
See us fly
To the sky;
Hear us sing,
On the wing,
Up in the old oak-tree.
Birds, and birds, and birds! Have you any idea how many kinds of birds
there are? I am very sorry you could not count them all. And such
queer fellows many of them are! There are butcher-birds and
tailor-birds, soldier-birds--the penguins, you know, who stand on the
sea-shore like companies of soldiers, "heads up, eyes front, arms
(meaning wings) at the sides"--and sailor-birds. It is about one of
the sailor-birds and his babies that I am going to tell you now. She
is called the Little Grebe, or sometimes, by her intimate friends, the
Dabchick. She is a pretty little bird, about nine inches long, with
brown head and back, and grayish-white breast. She and her husband are
both extremely fond of the water. "We are first cousins to the
Divers!" they sometimes say proudly. "The Divers are never happy away
from the water, and neither are we. It is very vulgar to live on land
all the time. One might almost as well have four legs, and be a
creature at once!" (The Divers are a very proud family, and speak of
all quadrupeds as "creatures.") Mr. and Mrs. Grebe have very
curiously webbed feet, looking more like a horse-chestnut leaf with
three lobes than anything else. They are excellent swimmers and
divers; indeed, in diving, the Great Northern Diver himself is not so
quick and alert. If anything frightens them, pop! they are under the
water in the shaking of a feather; and you may sometimes see them in a
pond, popping up and down like little absurd Jacks-in-the-box. As they
think the land so very vulgar, of course they do not want to bring up
their children on it.
Oh, dear, no! They find a pleasant, quiet stream, or pond, where there
are plenty of reeds and rushes growing in the water, and where there
is no danger of their being disturbed by "creatures." Then they go to
work and make a raft, a regular raft, of strong stems of water-plants,
reeds, and arrow-heads, plaited and woven together with great care and
skill. It is light enough to float, and yet strong enough to bear the
weight of the mother-bird.
While she is building it she sits, or stands, on another and more
roughly built raft, which is not meant to hold together long. Mr.
Grebe helps her, pulling up the water-plants and cutting off the stems
the right length; and so this little couple work away till the
raft-nest is quite ready. Then Mrs. Grebe takes her place on it, and
proceeds to lay and hatch her eggs. There are five or six eggs, and
they are white when she lays them; but they do not keep their
whiteness long, for the water-weeds and the leaves that cover the
raft soon decay, and stain the pretty white eggs, so that they are
muddy brown by the time they are hatched. Well, there little Madame
Grebe sits, brooding contentedly over her eggs, and thinking how
carefully she will bring up her children, so that they will be a
credit to the family of the Divers. Mr. Grebe paddles, and dives and
pops up and down about the nest, and brings her all sorts of good
things to eat,--worms for dinner, minnows for supper, and for
breakfast the most delicate and appetizing of flies and beetles. One
day, when he brings his wife's dinner (a fine stickle-back), he finds
her in a state of great excitement.
"My dear," she says, "I am going to move. I cannot endure this place
another hour. I only waited to tell you about it."
"Why, what is the matter, my love?" asks Mr. Grebe, in amazement.
"Some creatures have been here," answers little madam,
indignantly,--"huge, ugly monsters, with horns; cows, I believe they
are called. They have torn up the reeds, and muddied the water; and,
if you will believe it, Dabchick, one of them nearly walked right over
me; then I flew in his face, and gave him a good fright, I can tell
you. But the whole thing has upset me very much, and I am determined
to leave the place."
"Very well, my love," says the dutiful Dabchick. "Whatever you say is
always right!"
Accordingly, when she has finished her dinner, Mrs. Grebe puts one
foot into the water, and paddles her raft away as skilfully as if she
were an Indian in a birch canoe. She steers it round the corners, and
paddles on and on, till she finds another quiet nook, where there is
no sign of any "creatures." Then she draws in her paddle-foot, and
broods quietly again, while Mr. Grebe, who has followed her, goes to
explore the new surroundings, and see what he can pick up for supper.
After a time the muddy brown eggs crack open one by one, and out come
the young Dabchicks, pretty, little, fuzzy brown balls. They shake
themselves, and look at each other, and say how-d'-ye-do to their
mother and father; and then, without any more delay, pop! they go into
the water. "Hurrah!" says one. "I can swim!"
Out here papa finds her,
Lifts her tenderly,
Carries her safe home again,--
Never once wakes she.
When the breakfast all is o'er
Polly opes her eyes.
"Surely, mamma, I did dream,"
Says she in surprise,
"That I went out to the Park,
Where the birdies sing."
Mamma smiles; how can she chide
The winsome little thing!
This way and that way, one, two, three.
Come if you want a dance to see;
With his chubby hands on his dress so blue,
See what a baby boy can do.
One foot up and one foot down;
See him try to smile and frown;
He would look better, I do declare,
With some more teeth and a little more hair.
One, two, three, chick-a-dee-dee!
This I take the fact to be,
That there never was, on sea nor shore,
Such a queer little dance as this before!
When little Sam was six years old, he began to go to school. His
teacher gave him a merit card whenever he was good all day. But
sometimes he whispered, or made a noise in school, and then he did not
get one.
"I will give you a penny whenever you bring home a card," said Sam's
father.
After that Sam was very good, and brought home a card almost every
day. He saved up his pennies, and when he was seven years old, he
bought a pretty toy boat.
Sam's sister Hattie went with him to the duck-pond to see him sail the
boat. But soon she grew tired, and went back to the house.
"I wish I had something to put into my boat," thought Sam.
He looked around and saw Hattie's doll under a tree. Hattie had
forgotten it when she went to the house. It was a pretty wax doll,
with long flaxen hair, and blue eyes that would open and shut. It was
dressed in pink silk, and had a little straw hat with a pink feather.
"I will give Miss Dolly a sail," thought Sam.
He put the doll in the boat, and pushed it out on the water.
"Hattie, Hattie!" he cried, "come and see your doll taking a sail."
Just as he spoke an old duck swam against the boat, and gave it such
a push that Miss Dolly fell off into the water. Before Sam could reach
her with a long stick she sank to the bottom of the pond.
Hattie cried until she had no tears left to shed, and Sam felt like
crying, too. He knew he ought not to have taken his sister's doll.
He went on saving his pennies just as he had done before he bought the
boat. And when he opened his tin bank on his next birthday he found
that he had nearly three dollars. What do you think he bought? I am
afraid you would never guess, so I will tell you. He bought a new doll
for Hattie, and it was even prettier than the one he had drowned in
the duck-pond.
A dear little maid, with sun-bonnet red
Tied carefully over her little brown head,
With two little bare feet, so active and brown,
Has started to travel to Strawberry town.
"And pray where is that?" Oh dear! don't you know?
It's out in the field where the strawberries grow;
Where papa, and Henry, and Sue, in the sun,
Pick the sweet, big, red berries so fast, one by one.
"It's a very great ways," says the dear little maid,
"To Strawberry town, and I'm so afraid."
And so as companions, to keep her from harm,
She takes two fat kittens, one under each arm.
She trudges along with brown eyes opened wide,
The kittens hugged sociably up to each side;
With ears sticking up and tails hanging down,
She carries them bravely to Strawberry town.
Flossie took to the sea very early. She did not like to be bathed, but
she was very fond of playing in the water.
One day, when she was at her bath, her mother's back was turned, and
little Miss Flossie turned her slipper into a boat and set it afloat
in her little bath-tub. Then she pushed it about and made believe it
was sailing. By and by it got full of water and sank, crew and all.
This made her cry, and that made her mother look round. Flossie's
shoe-boat was taken from her, and then she cried more. Her mother knew
best, and was very firm. Miss Flossie had to give up being a sailor,
and put on her pink dress and go downstairs.
Little Nellie lived in California. Her papa was going on a visit to
his old home in Maine, but Nellie was to stay at home with her mamma.
Just before her father left, her mother took his great-coat, brushed
it, and said, "I have put some handkerchiefs in this pocket, and in
the other one is a nice lunch of cake and fruit."
The father and mother were so busy that they took no notice of Nellie.
But she had heard what mamma said. Her first thought was that she must
put something in papa's pocket, too.
Her mother had been changing Nellie's clothes, and a soiled little
stocking lay on the floor. The child had a small cake of maple sugar
in her hand that she was eating. She took up the stocking and crammed
the sugar down into the toe. She then rolled it up tight and tucked it
down in one corner of her papa's pocket. No one saw her do it. The
first that was known of what she had done was one day after her papa
had reached his old home. He was searching his pocket for something
when he felt the little stocking. He took it out, and when he saw what
it was, what a good laugh he had! And how it made him think of his
little Nellie, who was so far away!
Nellie's papa showed me the little stocking and the cake of sugar. He
said he would save them until Nellie was older, and she could then see
what a nice lunch she had put up for her papa.
Bow-wow! Here I am again! I told you before that my name is Dime; but
the baby calls me "Bow-wow." Do you know why? It is because I always
say "Bow-wow." It is all the word I know how to say.
Do you know our baby? She has big black eyes, and her mouth looks like
a pink rosebud. She is a sweet little girl. I love her dearly. I did
not like her when she first came. That was a long time ago. My master
was very fond of her. That made me feel cross. I used to bark at baby
and show all my teeth. After that they did not let me come near her. I
did not see the baby for a long time. I did not care for that.
My master did not seem to like me then. When he saw me, he said, "Go
away, Dime! Go away, bad dog! You are not good to the baby." So I was
not happy. I made up my mind to bite that baby.
It was a long time before I got a chance to bite her; but one day I
found her alone. She was in her little crib. I put my paws on her
crib.
But I did not bite her, after all. Shall I tell you why? She was too
pretty to bite. So I kissed the baby, and I have loved her ever since.
Now, my master likes me again. He pats my head and says, "Good old
dog! Good Dime! You love the baby, don't you?"
I am glad I am not a cross dog now. I feel better when I am good.
Don't you?
"Come, Freddie, time you were in bed long ago," said mamma.
"Don't want to go!" cried Fred. "I wish I never had to go to bed!"
But in a few moments Fred was snugly tucked away. Everything grew dim,
and Fred's eyes began to close. Very soon he heard a little voice from
somewhere, and started up.
Perched on his knee was the queerest little man he had ever seen. In
one hand he held a long pin, and this he often thrust at Fred.
"What are you doing that for?" asked Fred. "To keep you awake," said
the little dwarf. "You are in Wide-Awake Land, and no one goes to
sleep here."
Fred sat up in bed and looked about. Was it really Wide-Awake Land?
Needn't he ever go to bed again? "O, I am glad!" he said.
There were many other boys and girls in this queer land, and most of
them looked very unhappy.
"What is the matter?" asked Fred of a little boy who was crying hard.
"I'm tired and sleepy," sobbed the boy.
"Why don't you go to sleep then?" asked Fred.
"Humph! I guess you haven't been here long, or you'd know."
"No, I've just come; I think it's nice."
"Wait till you get sleepy," said the boy. "I used to think Wide-Awake
Land would be nice. I believe Sleepy Land would be nicer now."
"Yes," added Fred; "but why can't you go to sleep?"
"Because the little men that you see everywhere carry pins. They prick
us when we try to sleep. O, I wish I hadn't come!" And the boy began
to cry again. Fred thought he was very silly, and ran off to find some
other new-comer.
Night came at last. Big lamps were hung on the trees and made the
place as light as day. The little men were flying about to keep the
sleepy ones awake.
Fred got sleepy at last, and began to nod. A little man thrust a big
pin into him. "You must keep awake," he said. Fred tried hard, but his
eyes would shut, and then would come the wicked pin. At last he
screamed aloud.
"Why, Fred! what is the trouble?" and he looked up. There was mamma.
"I don't like Wide-Awake Land," cried Fred. "I will go to sleep when
you want me to after this."
"I think you are dreaming, Fred," replied mamma.
"I was, but I am awake now."
"Well, dear, you are in Sleepy Land now. So good night, and pleasant
dreams."
Lulu was six years old last spring. She came to make a visit at her
grandfather's, and stayed until after Thanksgiving.
Lulu had lived away down in Cuba ever since she was a year old. Her
cousins had written to her what a good time they had on Thanksgiving
Day; so she was very anxious to be at her grandfather's at that time.
They do not have a Thanksgiving Day down in Cuba. That is how Lulu did
not have one until she was six years old.
She could hardly wait for the day to come. Such a grand time as they
did have! Lulu did not know she had so many cousins until they came to
spend the day at her grandfather's. It did not take them long to get
acquainted. Before time for dinner they felt as if they had always
known each other.
The dinner was the grand event of the day. Lulu had never seen so long
a table except at a hotel, nor some of the vegetables and kinds of
pie.
Lulu had never tasted turkey before. Her grandmother would not have
one cooked until then, so she could say that she had eaten her first
piece of turkey on Thanksgiving Day.
After dinner they played all kinds of games. All the uncles and aunts
and grown-up cousins played blind-man's-buff with them.
In a land where summer lingers,
Far from Northern rains and snows,
Where, like loving, clasping fingers,
Twines the jasmine with the rose,
There I found a little maiden:
Oh! her eyes were black as night,
And her tiny hands were laden
Down with blossoms pearly white.
Sought she all along the wayside,
'Mong the ferns and waving palms,
Where the tiniest flower might hide
From her sweet protecting arms.
"What fresh treasure are you seeking?"
Asked I of the little one,
For a myriad blooms were peeping
Through the mosses to the sun.
"Have you never heard, dear lady,
Of the sweetest flower that blooms,--
It is neither proud nor stately,
Like the lily and the rose;
"But it brightens every pathway,
Springing 'neath your careless tread.
Till the sun, with quickening ray,
Kisses soft its drooping head.
"Then its petals quick unclosing,
Freshly sweet with morning dew,--
It is left for our supposing
That the story must be true,--
"How it shyly waits the coming
Of the glorious King of Day,
And that hence the pretty naming
Of a Sun-Kiss, so they say?"
Mrs. Brown read a little article in the newspaper one evening, about
"Country week for poor children."
"Husband," said she, "I have an idea. We have such a good farm, and so
many nice things, suppose we take some boarders this summer, who can't
afford to pay anything."
When she told him what she meant, Mr. Brown thought it a very good
idea, indeed.
"The currants and raspberries are ripe. I'll see if Mrs. Anderson
knows of some nice children, who will have to stay in the hot streets
of the city all summer. We will ask them to come here."
Of course, Mrs. Anderson knew of some nice children. She belonged to a
mission-school, and knew dozens of them. So, the next Wednesday, when
Mr. Brown drove down to the station, there she was, and two little
ones with her, Lina and Carl Schmidt. Carl was almost a baby, and went
to sleep as soon as they were in the carriage; but Lina held her
breath with delight as she rode to the farm. She was half afraid, too,
and held on very tightly if old Billy went faster than a walk. As Mr.
Brown watched the bright little face he began to think his wife's idea
was a splendid one.
"Well, little one," said Mrs. Brown to Lina, when they reached the
house, "what do you think of the country?"
"Oh, I do want to take such long breaths!" said Lina, "I wish my
mamma could see it too."
"The first thing for these small folks," added Mrs. Brown, "is some of
Brindle's nice milk."
Carl waked up long enough to drink some, and say, "Dood, dood." Then
he grew sleepy again, and Mrs. Brown laid him on a shawl upon the
grass, under the trees. The hens gathered around him, looked at each
other and clucked, as much as to say, "What kind of a queer creature
is this?" Young Mr. Bantie was about to peck him to find out, when
they heard a little voice calling "Biddy, Biddy, Biddy!" from the
barn. Off they went, half flying and half running.
Mrs. Brown had given Lina a tin pail, with corn in it to scatter to
the hens. They came from all directions, and got around her so closely
that she was afraid to stir. She had taken out one handful of the
corn, but was afraid to throw it. Then the greedy hens began to peck
her hand, and try to get it out of the pail. She began to cry so loud
that every one ran out of the house to see what was the matter. It was
funny enough to see her, standing in the middle of that greedy crowd
of hens, with her eyes shut very tightly, and her mouth very wide
open.
When Carl waked up, he wanted some more milk. Mrs. Brown said, "We'll
go down and see Brindle milked, and you shall have it nice and warm."
Lina had seen pictures of cows, but never a live one. She had no idea
they were so big. Mrs. Brown asked her if she would like to milk; but
she thought she would rather stand at a little distance. As for Carl,
he shut up his eyes, and tried to get out of sight of the creature.
However, he liked the warm milk very much.
Lina spent most of the next day in the garden. She helped pick the
peas and beans, and stem the currants. She went with Mr. Brown to find
the eggs, and held Billy's halter while he drank at the trough. Every
day was full of pleasure, and Mr. and Mrs. Brown had just as good a
time as the children. At the end of the week they couldn't bear to let
them go; so it came about that the children's week, for Lina and Carl,
lasted all summer.
In winter, when it freezes,
In winter, when it snows,
The road to school seems long and drear,
O'er which the school-boy goes.
But when the pleasant summer comes,
With birds and fruit and flowers,
The road to school, how short it is!
And short the sunny hours!
But to the boy who loves to learn,
And wisdom strives to gain,
The road to school is always short,
In sunshine, snow, or rain.
Sammy Brown had a monkey. He bought him of an organ-player. He named
him Billy.
Sammy's mother did not know what a naughty monkey he was. If she had,
she would not have given Sammy the money to buy him.
Sammy thought he was very cunning. All the boys at school thought so
too. They all wanted one just like him. Sammy had him out every
Saturday afternoon. He was dressed in a gay little uniform. He would
play on a drum. He was fond of mischief; and when no one was watching
him he would do some very queer things. He would take the spools from
Mrs. Brown's work-basket. He would carry them away and hide them.
He would take her thimble and wax, and hide them too.
Sometimes he would bring them back again. Sometimes Mrs. Brown would
have to find them herself. This gave her a good deal of trouble.
At last Billy acted so badly, that Mrs. Brown told Sammy that she
could not have him in the house any longer. One morning Mrs. Brown
went away to spend the day.
She thought the monkey was fastened out of the house. But he got in
through a window. When Mrs. Brown came home she did think of Billy.
She opened the door of her pantry. She saw a dreadful sight. She knew
at once that Billy had been there. He had moved the dishes all about,
from one shelf to another. He had poured milk and sugar over the
floor. He had emptied bottles of medicine into clean dishes. He had
broken up a whole loaf of cake and scattered it around. He had eaten
out the middle of a pie, and turned it over in the plate. Mrs. Brown
could not find her spoons and forks anywhere. But she found them
afterwards in the cellar.
Now Mrs. Brown had to go right to work and clean her pantry. After she
had put that in order, she made a fire in the stove. All this time
Billy was not seen anywhere.
The fire had been burning a few minutes, when Mrs. Brown heard a
terrible scratching in the oven, and out jumped Billy as spry as ever.
He ran out of doors. He was not seen again until the next morning.
Then Mrs. Brown told Sammy that the monkey had made so much work for
her, that she could not have him any longer.
Sammy saw that his mother was very much in earnest.
So he sold Billy to a pedler who came along the next day.
The pedler gave him fifty cents for Billy.
Sammy was sorry to let him go, but he wanted to please his mother.
Bessie Lee was six years old when she went to the mountains of North
Carolina with her father.
What Bessie liked best of all were the nice donkey rides every
morning. The poor donkeys didn't get much rest, for the little folks
kept them busy all day. Bessie was kind to them, but some of the
children were not. Bessie liked a donkey named Kate best of all.
One day Bessie's father put her in the saddle, and Kate kicked up.
When Bessie was lifted off, and the saddle removed, a great bleeding
sore was found on the poor donkey's back.
Bessie felt very sorry for poor Kate, and said, "Papa, I don't want to
ride to-day, but please do not send Kate back to the stables."
"Why not, Bessie?" said Mr. Lee.
"O, papa, the man will let her to some of the rough boys, and they
will hurt her back."
Mr. Lee was pleased to see his little daughter's kindness to the poor
dumb donkey; but he wished to know if Bessie would deny herself for
Kate.
"Well, Bessie," said her father, "if you have any money, give it to
the man when he comes for the donkey. Tell him you wish to keep Kate
all day."
"I have the money you gave me for ice-cream," said Bessie. "Will that
pay the man?"
It was enough, and was given to the man. Bessie kept the donkey all
day. She led Kate to the greenest places in the yard, and let her eat
the grass. She divided her apples with Kate, and carried her a little
pail of water.
At night Bessie told her father she had been happy all day. He made
her still happier by telling her she could keep Kate every day while
she was in the mountains.
Bessie kissed her father and was soon fast asleep. She dreamed of
riding in a little carriage drawn by six white donkeys.
Pauline had no little brothers or sisters, and no little playmates.
Her father's home was away out in the country, far away from any
neighbors. Being so much alone, Pauline thought of all sorts of queer
ways to amuse herself. One day she invited her papa and mamma to go
down to see her "Nursery," as she called it. It was a little, square
piece of ground, enclosed by a neat low fence, made of narrow slats,
placed close together. All kinds of flowers were planted around it.
Besides, there were some little, flat buildings all along one side.
What do you think they saw there? Toads of all sorts and sizes, from
the wee baby toads to the great big grandfathers. Then such a
strange array of garments!--for they were all dressed. Pauline had
made for her pets all kinds of clothes. There they were, hopping
around, some in bright calico dresses, and some in the funniest red
flannel pants and coats you ever saw.
Day after day Pauline went to her "Nursery" to feed and play with her
strange little pets. But one morning she ran down as usual, after
breakfast, to find all of the toad family had disappeared. The fence
that enclosed her "Nursery" was completely broken down. Not a single
toad was left of the funny creatures who had lived there.
Pauline felt very sorry to lose them. She told her mamma she was sure
they would all die of shame when they found other toads did not wear
any clothes at all.
Little Fred Mason's father took him to an exhibition of wild animals.
After they had looked at the elephants, lions, tigers and bears, they
went to see the monkeys. On the way, Mr. Mason bought two large
oranges and gave them to Fred.
There were six cages of small animals. One of them was for the "happy
family." Fred thought the creatures in it must be called the "happy
family" because the dogs, cats and monkeys were all the time teasing
and plaguing one another. One monkey had a rat in his lap. He tended
it as a mother does her baby. The monkey was happy, but Mr. Mason did
not think the rat liked it very well.
Fred put one orange in his side pocket. He could not wait until he got
home to eat the other. As he walked along among the cages he seemed to
care more for the fruit than for the animals. He sucked the orange
with all his might till he came to a cage with three monkeys in it.
One of them looked very sober and solemn. One opened his mouth and
seemed to be laughing. All of them looked at Fred and held out their
hands.
They could not talk; if they could they would have said, "Go halves!"
The orange was nice and sweet; Fred did not wish to "go halves." He
turned away, for he did not like to be asked for that which he was not
willing to give. The monkeys put their hands out for some of the
oranges, but Fred looked the other way.
Fred should have looked at the monkeys, for the one nearest to him put
out his long arm and snatched the orange from his hand. Fred tried to
get it again. While he was doing so, the solemn monkey reached down
and took the orange from his pocket. Fred did not think how near he
was to the cage.
Fred began to cry. The laughing monkey had no orange. He was afraid of
the solemn monkey, but he chased the one that had stolen the orange
Fred was eating all over the cage. He got it at last.
Fred's father bought two more oranges for him, and he did not go near
the cages again.
"Ring--a--round--a--rosy!"
Cheeks just like a posy;
Eyes that twinkle with delight,--
Could there be a fairer sight?
Little feet that dance in glee;
Voices singing merrily.
Won't you stop a little while?
At my question you will smile:
"Rosy I have never seen,--
Tell me, is she some fair queen?
Have your lily hands now crowned her,
While you formed a ring around her?
"Why 'draw buckets of water
For my lady's daughter'?
Has she spoiled her pretty dress?
Ah! to wash her face, I guess!
Very hard 'tis to unravel
What is meant, dears, by 'green gravel.'
Then, you say, 'How barley grows
You, nor I, nor nobody knows;'
Oats, peas, beans, too, you include:
If the question be not rude,
Darlings, tell why this is done."
"Ha! ha!" laugh they; "it's such fun!"
Something very strange happened at our house the other day. In our
cold country we keep a stove in our sitting-room all summer. Sometimes
we have to build a fire, even in July and August.
One afternoon I was surprised to hear a great scratching in the room.
After looking about a little, I found it came from the stove. Scratch,
scratch, scratch, as if some creature was trying hard to get out. I
called my boy of eight years. For a few moments all was still, and we
concluded the poor thing had got out as it had come in.
But we were mistaken; soon came that same clattering noise again. We
removed the top of the stove and peeped in; nothing was to be seen in
the darkness. We then made bold to open the door and poke about; but
with no better result. After listening, we decided that the creature
was between the lining and outside.
But how were we to get at it? Annie came in from the kitchen armed
with a poker. We took out the damper and poked out all the soot and
ashes. We brought to the front--what do you think? Why, a little bird,
a chimney swallow, chirping and fluttering, poor thing, with fright.
One wing seemed to droop a little; so we took it up and put it in a
box. If we supposed it was going to stay there we were much mistaken.
Soon the bird began to recover, and with a little hop was upon the
edge of the box cocking its head and looking with its big, bright eyes
all about, as if on the alert for any new danger.
A tree was the best and safest place, and Hervin carried it out and
set it gently down.
It rose, feebly at first, then soared away over the tops of the
houses.
Wasn't that a queer place to find a birdie? You are glad it got out,
for that very night we had to have a fire.
John and Lincoln have a fleet of ten boats. They made these boats
themselves. They are made out of flat chips. They are whittled round
at one end and pointed at the other. Each boat has a mast and a sail.
Sometimes they tie these boats together, and call them the _John and
Lincoln_ fleet; they call each other "Captain John" and "Captain
Lincoln." They have a big boat called the _Mary_; aunt Mary gave it to
them. The _Mary_ is their flagship.
One day the fleet were all out when a storm came. The wind blew, the
rain fell, and the waves were big. Six of the little boats were
wrecked on a rock. But the _Mary_ only plunged a little. It was great
fun. What, a storm at sea great fun! Yes, because John and Lincoln
made the storm themselves. They made the wind with the bellows; they
poured the big raindrops from the watering-pot; and they made the high
waves by dragging shingles through the water.
The _Starlight_ was in Gloucester harbor for three days, and Rob and
Phyllis went on board with mamma one day, to lunch with Arthur and
Helen and their mamma. They had never been on a yacht before. They
were surprised to find it so pretty. It was finished in beautiful
mahogany with a great deal of brass-work, the latter brightly shining,
too, for the housekeeping on a yacht is always first-rate.
The ceiling of the cabin was of blue satin, and so were the curtains,
which hung before the funny little windows, and at the doors. On each
side of the cabin was a long seat covered with blue satin cushions.
These cushions lifted up, and underneath were kept books, dishes,
clothes, in fact, all sorts of things. Every bit of room on a vessel
is always precious, there can be so little of it, anyway. Helen showed
Phyllis her sleeping room. It was a mite of a place, about half as big
as the bed Phyllis slept in at home. The walls were lined with blue
satin and the bed was covered with blue satin, and it was a real blue
satin nest for a little girl, instead of for a bird.
Then they went on deck to watch the sailors, who were running up and
down the rigging. Arthur has been on his father's yacht so much, for
his father owns the _Starlight_, that he can run up and down the
ratlines almost as fast as the sailors can. The ratlines are the rope
ladders you see in the picture. There was on board a big Newfoundland
dog named Gil. Arthur's aunt Lou told them a story about Gil.
Now Gil once belonged to an officer in our Navy and he sometimes went
to sea with his master.
Once when he went on a voyage a little kitten went too. She was
everybody's pet and a very friendly kitty. She was afraid of Gil,
though, and would never let him come near her, but would make such a
loud spitting and growling at him, when he tried to play with her,
that poor Gil had to go away and play by himself.
One day kitty fell overboard and Gil saw her and plunged into the sea
to save her. Kitty thought it was bad enough to fall into the water,
but to see Gil come jumping after her was too much, and she was ready
to die with fright.
When he opened his great mouth to take her and hold her above water,
she felt sure that her last moment had come, and she fought and
scratched so, that Gil could not get hold of her.
The officers stood watching Gil and pussy. Poor little mistaken pussy
was getting very tired and would soon sink if she did not let good old
Gil save her.
Suddenly Gil dove down out of sight and then rose again just under
kitty, so that she stood on his back. Puss was so glad to feel
something solid under her little tired legs, that she clung to it with
all her nails. Then Gil swam slowly to meet the boat which had been
sent to pick him up.
I've got a brand-new parasol
(Of pink silk trimmed with lace),
But auntie says 'twill never keep
The shine out of _my_ face.
Why not, I wonder: if it's held
Just in the proper place,
Why won't it keep the sunshine out
Of anybody's face?
She says thick clouds would hardly do
(Much less pink silk and lace)
To keep the merry sunshine out
Of such a dimpled face.
But mamma says, "Go take your walk,
And never mind aunt Grace."
I 'spect I'll have to let the sun
Keep shining in my face!
He was David Livingstone. He was a missionary, and a great traveller
too.
He lived almost all his life in Africa. In some parts of Africa there
are lions. Once he was staying at a certain village. Every night the
lions broke into the yards and carried off a cow or two. So a party of
natives went out to hunt for them.
Livingstone was with them. They saw some lions, and tried to surround
them in a circle. But the lions got away.
They were coming home when Livingstone saw a great lion. He was
sitting on a rock not far away. He fired at him, but did not hit him.
He stopped to load his gun again.
He heard the men shout. He turned and saw the lion all ready to
spring.
(A lion crouches to spring, like a cat.)
The lion sprang upon Livingstone, and seized his shoulder with his
great teeth. He shook him just as a cat shakes a mouse.
Was Livingstone frightened? He was frightened when the lion seized
him. But after he shook him he wasn't a bit afraid.
He said the lion shook the fear all out of him. He felt as if he was
in a pleasant dream. He only wondered what the lion would do next.
He did not do anything next. He stood with his great paw on
Livingstone's head till another man fired at him. Then he sprang on
that man and bit him.
Then he sprang on a third man and bit him. And then--he rolled over,
dead! So Livingstone escaped.
Livingstone afterwards visited England. The little English children
used to ask him to tell them the story of how the lion shook him.
The lion belongs to the cat family. Does not the lion in the picture
look like a big handsome cat?
He always begins his queer cry about an hour before sunrise.
Then he is heard again just at noon, and again at sunset. So he has
another name. He is called the "Bushman's clock."
In Australia there are great tracts of land where few white people
live. These tracts of land are called "The Bush;" and the settlers on
these lands are called Bushmen.
The laughing jackass is a very sociable bird. He likes to watch the
Bushman at his work. He watches him as he pitches his tent, and builds
his fire and cooks his supper. He is a kingfisher.
Kingfishers generally live near the water. But this great brown fisher
lives in the woods. He eats crabs and insects. He relishes lizards
very much, and there are plenty of lizards in Australia.
He hates snakes. A great many snakes are found in Australia, and many
of them are very poisonous.
The laughing jackass is not a bit afraid of them. He kills them with
his long, sharp bill.
When he is angry he raises the crest on his head.
His color is a fine chestnut brown mixed with white. His wings are
slightly blue.
The mother-bird lays her eggs in a hole in a gum-tree. She does not
build a nest. She lays her eggs on the rotten wood at the bottom of
the hole. Her eggs are a lovely pearl white.
Here is one of the black men who live in Australia. He is listening to
the cry of the laughing jackass.
Jocko was homesick. Jocko was a forest creature. He was born to tread
the ground, and climb trees, and eat sweet wild fruits.
Jocko liked to leap from tree to tree, and run about over miles of
woodland. Now he found himself in a cage. He called and cried, but
none of his little brown playmates answered.
He could see only blue waves, and the ropes and masts and sails of the
ship. He was tossed up and down. His cage swung from side to side. The
motion made him sick--seasick.
After many days, he saw the land again. But it was not forest land. It
was brown land--city land. No moss, no vines, no dewy green grass, no
flowers! All stone and brick! His cage was carried into a hotel
dining-room where people came and sat down and talked in German, and
ate things that Jocko knew were not good to eat--bread and pies and
cheese and sauerkraut and meat. Oh, how Jocko wanted a fresh sweet
cocoanut!
But by and by Jocko was not so homesick. The cook was kind to him, and
gave him sweet bits to eat. The visitors took him up and petted him.
The little girl who lived at the hotel made him a nice bed in the
little crib she used to sleep in.
So at last Jocko had a good time, and forgot about the woods.
But one day little Gretchen played a trick on him to see what he would
do. She knew he was fond of white lump sugar. So she filled a bottle
with lumps of sugar. Then she gave it to Jocko.
Jocko was wild with delight when he saw the sugar. He jumped up in a
chair and lifted the bottle to his mouth.
But Gretchen had put in a cork. The sugar would not pour out.
It was very funny then to see what trouble Jocko was in. He would
tilt the bottle up and try to drink the sugar out of the neck. Then he
would try to shake it out at the bottom. Then he would sit still and
look at the lumps. Then he would try to bite through the glass. Then
he would jump down and run away. Then he would come back and catch the
bottle again and roll the lumps about, and chatter and scold as he
heard them rattle.
This went on for several days. Everybody came in to see little
Gretchen's monkey and his sugar bottle.
But one day the cook let a jar of olives fall. It broke, and the
olives rolled out on the floor. Jocko gave a little scream of joy.
Like a flash, up he sprang to a high cupboard with his sugar bottle,
and gave it a mighty fling. Down it came--crash!
Out the lumps rolled over the floor. Down sprang Jocko. He shouted
with delight. He had a sweet feast.
Oh, how he munched and crunched and chattered! And now, what do you
think happened?
He would seize every bottle and can and pitcher that was left within
reach. Up he would run to the top of some high cupboard or shelf and
dash it to the floor! Such mischief as he made!
Little Gretchen had to give him away at last because he broke
everything he could lay his roguish paws upon.
He saw the stormy petrels. They flew about the ship almost every day.
They liked to eat the scraps the cook threw overboard.
The petrels are sooty black. Their feet are partly webbed.
They sit and float upon the water. They run about over the water. In
stormy weather they fly through the dashing foam.
Bobby's mamma told him many things about the stormy petrel. She told
him how the stormy petrel flies far, far away from land. His home is
on the sea. He can fly all day long and not be tired.
The stormy petrel hardly ever goes on land except to lay her eggs. Her
nest is in a hole in some high cliff by the sea. She hatches one
little bird. It looks like a ball of fluff. The nest smells very oily.
The stormy petrel is very oily, like all sea birds. He is so full of
oil that the people of the Faroe Islands sometimes use him for a lamp.
They take a dead petrel and run a wick through him. Then they set him
on end and light the wick and he gives a very good light indeed!
The sailors call the stormy petrel "Mother Carey's chickens."
The name of Bobby's ship was _The Jefferson_. Once when the
_Jefferson_ was in an English port, Bobby saw something very pretty.
It was a bird's nest. It was built in the rigging of a ship.
This ship had been lying in port a good while. The nest was built in
a block where some of the cordage runs. It was built by a pair of
chaffinches.
Now the chaffinch is not a sea bird; it is a land bird. It builds its
nest in trees and hedges. It builds a cosey little nest out of moss
and wool and hair. It is deep and round like a cup.
But this pretty pair of chaffinches found a new place in which to
build their nest. It was even more airy than the top of a tree. See it
in the picture! Day by day Bobby watched them as they flew busily to
and fro. Many other people watched them too.
The chaffinch is a cheerful little bird. In the countries where he
lives, he is heard merrily whistling in the spring time. There he sits
singing to his mate who is keeping her eggs warm. Happy little fellow!
Little boys and girls believe that all mosquitoes sting and bite.
But they do not. The male mosquito never does. He wears a plume on his
head, and does nothing but dance in the sunshine.
It is the female mosquito that sings around our heads at night and
keeps us awake. It is she who bites us. Look at her head. This is the
way it looks under a microscope. Do you wonder that her bite hurts?
She lays her eggs in a very queer way. First she finds a puddle or a
pool of warmish water. Then she fastens herself to some stick, or
sliver, or stem, or floating leaf, by her first two rows of legs. Then
she lays about three hundred tiny eggs.
The eggs cling together in the shape of a boat or canoe, and float
upon the water. In about three days they hatch. Then the warm water is
full of "wigglers."
By and by these wigglers have wings. The outside skin bursts open.
They lift their heads and shoulders out of the water. Then off they
fly--a whole swarm of singing, stinging mosquitoes.
We are all glad when the cold weather comes and the mosquito goes.
I suppose you think if you lived in a cold country, you would not be
troubled by mosquitoes.
But in Lapland, a very cold country, the mosquitoes come in crowds and
clouds. Sometimes they are so thick they hide people in the road like
a fog. What do you think of that?
The bobolink laughs in the meadow;
The wild waves laugh on the sea;
They sparkle and glance, they dimple and dance,
And are merry as waves can be.
The green leaves laugh on the trees;
The fields laugh out with their flowers;
In the sunbeam's glance, they glow and they dance.
And laugh to their falling showers.
The man laughs up in the moon;
The stars too laugh in the sky;
They sparkle and glance, they twinkle and dance.
Then why, then, pray, shouldn't I?
Oh, I laugh at morn and at night,
I laugh through the livelong day.
I laugh and I prance, I skip and I dance.
So happy am I and so gay.
There were seven ducklings. The very first thing they did was to go
and tumble into a bucket of water.
"Cluck-cluck-cluck! quaw-aw-awk! cr-r-r!" said the hen-mother. She was
so frightened she made just such a noise as she does when she sees a
hawk.
She thought they would all drown. But they didn't. They swam and dove
and shook the water from their little wings.
One day when they were about a quarter grown, Annie found
Fluffy-dumpty lying on the ground; she was quacking faintly. Her leg
was broken! Annie ran to papa.
"O papa! mend her leg just as you did my arm!" she said.
Papa is a doctor; and when Annie was a _very_ little girl she broke
her arm and papa mended it. So he did up Fluffy-dumpty's leg with a
splinter, and then wound a bandage round it. Annie took care of her.
Mary used to help Annie feed her with a spoon.
Fluffy-dumpty got well very fast. But when she was about three
quarters grown, she met with another accident. She fell down a steep
cellar way.
"Quack-quack! Take me out! Oh, take me out!" cried poor Fluffy-dumpty.
The other six ducks crowded around and looked down at her.
"We can't! we can't!" they cried. "We haven't got any hands. Call a
boy, do!" So Annie called Sam, who took her out.
How thankful Fluffy-dumpty was! She smoothed down her ruffled feathers
and said, "Quack-quack," softly. The other ducks all talked at once.
"What a narrow 'scape you had, Fluffy-dumpty!" said one duck.
"How did you happen to fall into that horrid place?" asked another.
"What a fine boy Sam is!" said a third duck.
"He's almost too good for a boy," said a fourth.
But it all sounded as if they only said "quack-quack!"
Every day of their lives these ducks got into the garden, and ate the
lettuce and strawberries and cabbage. So the gardener put a board over
the hole under the gate.
"Never mind," said big Broad-bill, "we know more ways than one." Then
the seven started off in a line, and marched round the garden till
they came to another hole, and in they went. The gardener was very
angry.
Bertie had gone off and left Vick. He was so eager to see the soldiers
parade that he forgot all about him. This had never happened before.
When Uncle Ned gave Vick to Bertie mamma said: "Now, Bertie, you must
take the care of Vick. If a boy has a dog he must learn to care for
him. You must see that Vick is fed. You must bathe and comb him every
day; and you must give him plenty of exercise."
But as I said, Bertie had forgotten Vick that day. Vick did not know
what to make of it. His heart was almost broken.
"This is too bad!" he howled. "Here am I shut up with two saucepans
and a dummy. No water to drink--no bone to gnaw--no little master to
play with--wow-ow-ow-ow!"
What a dismal howl it was! Mamma heard him; she was in the kitchen
making sponge cake. She could not leave it for a moment. But as soon
as it was baked she let Vick out.
There was Bertie just coming round the corner! He looked quite
ashamed. Yes, he had thought of Vick at last. He had come home for
him.
Did Vick forgive him? Doggies always forgive. They have loving and
generous hearts. He scrambled all over Bertie and licked his hands and
his face and off they went to see the soldiers--a very happy pair.
Do you think Bertie ever forgot Vick again?
Do you ever forget to care for your pets?
Every summer grandma Cushing has two visitors. Their names are Blanche
Cushing and Dorothy Cushing.
Blanche lives in Iowa. She has blue eyes and yellow hair and is seven
years old. Dorothy lives in New York City. She has brown eyes and
brown hair and is eight years old.
They love dearly to play in grandma's attic. There are queer old
bonnets and gowns and cocked hats hanging on the walls.
There are trunks full of caps and spectacles and old snuffers and no
end of queer things.
I cannot begin to tell you everything the cousins play. But there is
one thing they like to play ever so much.
They like to dress up in the queer old clothes and play Cinderella,
and Mother Hubbard, and Red Riding Hood.
When Blanche gets on her great-great-grandma Cushing's cap and
spectacles and long mits, she makes a very charming little Mother
Hubbard.
They sit in the big old chairs and tell stories. Dorothy likes to hear
about the wolves. There are wolves where Blanche lives.
"Yes, one day when I was a very, _very_ little girl," said Blanche, "a
horrid big wolf came up to the window and looked in. I was sitting in
mamma's lap, and he put his paws on the window and just looked at us
horrid!
"And then another time, mamma, you know, was going out to meet papa,
and she saw a big wolf on the ground, and she thought it was dead, and
she was going right up, and it wasn't dead a bit. It just got up and
runned off to the woods, and mamma was awful scared and runned away
too."
When Blanche tells the wolf stories they play "scared." It is fun to
play "scared." They shriek and run and hide.
One rainy day they had been playing Mother Hubbard.
"Now," said Blanche, "I will tell a b-eautiful wolf story. It will
make us awful scared. See if it doesn't!"
So she climbed up into a big chair and began. But right in the middle
of the story they heard something go scratch, scratch, very loudly.
"Oh, what is that, Dotty?" whispered Blanche, clutching Dorothy's arm.
Scratch, scratch, it went again, and then there was a great rattling.
"Oh, it's a wolf!" cried Dotty; and down the attic stairs they flew
pell-mell; through the kitchen chamber and the great unfinished
chamber, and down the back stairs; through the kitchen and the
dining-room, and burst into grandma's room all out of breath.
"What _is_ the matter, children?" asked grandma.
"Oh, there's a wolf in the attic," they both cried out.
"Nonsense! we don't have wolves in Massachusetts," said grandma.
"Well," said Dorothy, "something scratched dreadfully."
So grandma went up to the attic to see about it. "Where was the
noise?" she asked.
They pointed to the dark place behind the big chimneys. Grandma went
up and opened a door and out walked--a wolf! no; Towser, the old cat!
Blanche and Dorothy sometimes have another visitor in the attic. It is
a big rat. He lives in the barn. He has a road underground to the
house cellar. Then he comes up to the attic through the wall.
The cousins never know when to expect him. He comes in without
knocking. The first thing they know there he is looking at them with
bright eyes.
They have named him Bright-eyes. They feed him with cake and cheese.
He is very tame. Grandma says she never heard of such a thing as
feeding a rat. She says Bright-eyes eats her hens' eggs. He steals
them out of the nests.
So sleepy and demure is my wee Gracie,
So long and sober grows the little facie,
So silent are the red, red lips so sweet,
So quiet are the little hands and feet,
I know, yes, well I know
My Gracie wants to go
Into the soft, white nest where every night
My birdie folds her wings till morning light.
And now beside my knee the pretty lisper
Her evening prayer with folded hands must whisper,
While baby sister sleeps on mother's breast,
Lulled with our voices low to dreamy rest.
Then in her nightie white,
My restless sunbeam bright
Is hidden from her shoulders to her feet,
And tucked away in slumber soft and sweet.
A merry, white-robed figure at my side,
A laughing face, with blue eyes opened wide.
Red lips that kiss me in the early dawn
And tell me fast enough that night is gone.
Ripe and ready for play,
In the early morning gray,
Restless again are the small hands and feet,
Silent no longer, little lips so sweet.
Where is the sunbeam like my Gracie's eyes?
Blue as the blue of summer's bluest skies!
What sweeter wakening could be mine than this
The soft "Good morning!" of my daughter's kiss?
And thus each hour of day
Girl Gracie claims for play
Till comes the "Sand-man" with the twilight hour
And play has vanished 'neath his mystic power.
The magpie is a very handsome bird. He knows he is handsome, too. He
has a fine broad tail. There is a band of purple near the end of each
feather, and the end is green and purple.
He walks about with this handsome tail perked in the air. He does not
drag it in the dirt, not he!
He is a bright bird, too. He can learn to talk, and he is full of
pretty and naughty tricks. He is a--thief! He steals eggs from other
birds' nests. He strikes his bill through the egg and walks off with
it. And he does a worse thing than that. He steals the young birds and
eats them.
But the Magpie is very careful to build her nest so nobody shall steal
her eggs. In the first place she always builds on a high tree. She
chooses a tree that has a long smooth trunk, that the boys cannot
climb easily. How do you suppose she knows about mischievous boys? She
must make a study of boys.
She builds her nest of dry sticks and mud. She carpets it with wool
and fine roots. (Birds can always find plenty of wool sticking on the
bushes in sheep pastures. There is vegetable wool too, like the wool
on the growing ferns.) Then she makes a roof of sticks; she leaves
open a small round door at the side. So you see it is not easy for
boys or birds to steal her eggs.
Magpies like bright glittering things like silver spoons and rings.
They often steal them and hide them in their nests.
This Magpie is a European bird. There is a beautiful red Magpie that
lives in China.
The Park children went to the beach last summer. It was a small beach;
not at all like Nantasket Beach.
There were not many folks there. There was a young woman--a very queer
young woman indeed, Sam thought. She used to go out on the beach and
sit in a camp chair and read!
"Pshaw! who wants to read with a whole ocean to look at?" said Sam.
Such cunning little slippers as she wore! and her ruffles and hat! Oh,
my! She used to draw pictures sometimes, but Sam didn't know that.
"Halloo! there she is again!" shouted Sam one day. She was drawing a
picture of them that moment, but they did not know it. They were all
sliding down the sand cliff.
They had taken off their shoes and stockings, and were going in
bathing.
"Whoo-oop! hurrah! here we come! clear the track!" What a noise they
did make, to be sure!
But it did not disturb anybody. Nobody heard it but the young woman
and some cows in the pasture near by.
How warm and soft the sand was! It was as good as coasting in winter.
It was better!
Down they went into the water like so many ducks. They can all dive
and swim almost as well as ducks. Papa and mamma were off shore,
taking a sail together. They saw the slide down hill, and the plunge
into the water. They saw the brown and yellow heads bobbing about.
"Do look at them!" said mamma. "Perfect little Arabs!"
"Do 'em good," said papa. "Little Molly never had such rosy cheeks in
all her life."
"But think of their clothes!" said mamma.
Farmer Gray had a load of apples to sell one day. But nobody wanted
them. People offered him such a small sum of money for them, he said
he would rather give them away.
So he started for home with his load of apples. He drove down Summer
street, past the schoolhouse. The boys were having their recess.
Now Farmer Gray loved children. So when he saw these boys he thought,
"Here's just the market for my apples."
He stopped his horse and called out, "Do any of you boys know what to
do with apples?"
Then there _was_ a shout! "O yes, sir, we guess we do!" said all the
boys.
"Come on, then!" said Farmer Gray.
The boys crowded around the wagon, and the farmer tossed the apples to
them.
"It is well for you, boys, that I found no market for my apples this
morning," he said.
"That's so!" said the boys. Then they thanked him heartily.
Charlie Read said, "You are the funniest man I ever saw to stop and
give us the apples."
"You would like to see another just like me to-morrow, wouldn't you?"
said Farmer Gray.
"Yes, I would," said Charley, "and I should like to live with you
too."
Just then the school bell rang. The boys all shouted, "Good-by!
good-by!" as Farmer Gray drove off.
"I'm glad enough I didn't sell those apples this morning," thought
Farmer Gray.
Ah Kee is the funniest little fellow alive.
He can stand as straight as any boy I ever saw.
But the straighter he stands, the more you laugh.
He thinks he is very tall. He is about three feet tall.
He thinks he is a little gentleman, because he can drink out of a
coffee-cup and not spill a drop.
But Ah Kee oftener behaves like a rogue than like a gentleman.
There is always a look of mischief in his bright black eyes.
His mistress never allows him to go into the parlor by himself.
She knows he would sit on the brackets with the little statues.
She knows he would like to swing to and fro on the curtain tassels.
She knows he would like to jerk the bell-pull, and bring Rose up from
the kitchen.
She knows he would like to take the Sevres vases and walk up and down
the room with them in his arms.
No, Ah Kee, with his roguish tastes, is not to be trusted in the
parlor by himself.
But he sometimes comes in when she is there. Sometimes when she is
reading she hears a soft sound like this, "_lsp-s-s-s!_"
She jumps up, looks all around. Under the table, or in a corner she
sees a soft, round, feathery ball of fur--and one little paw raised,
all claws and motion.
Ah, that is Ah Kee, and Ah Kee means mischief. Perhaps he will spring
into his mistress' lap. Perhaps he will leap up on the piano. You
cannot be sure what he will decide to do.
Yes, Ah Kee is a monkey, a gay little spider monkey, with a long tail
that he likes to carry over his head in the shape of the letter S.
Ah Kee's mistress has made up her mind to do one thing. She will buy
Ah Kee a silver collar with a ring. She will buy Ah Kee a broad blue
ribbon.
Then, when she wants a quiet hour, she will slip the blue ribbon
through the collar ring, and tie Ah Kee to the door knob.
Dick and Gray,
My bird and cat,
Good friends are they:
Just think of that!
Dick pecks Gray's paw;
Gray winks and blinks.
"I'll not harm Dick,"
Is what he thinks.
So on the wall,
This sunny weather,
Chirping, purring,
They play together.
Down in the South Land, one morning in March, there was a great stir
among the birds. "Spring has come in the far North," they said. "Jack
Frost is going, the ice is melting, and now we'll go home-home!"
Bluebirds, and robins, and bobolinks, how glad they were! They got up
very early that morning, even for birds. They bathed in a tiny pond,
and preened their feathers. They ate their breakfast and then they
started, straight through the air, for the North.
Do you wonder how they knew the way? How does a bird know which way is
north and which way is south? There is a "Careful Gardener" who tells
the flowers when to bloom, and he tells the birds which way to fly.
They flew that day on and on; over the green fields bright with
flowers; over the trees covered with green leaves. By and by, they
came where the grass was not yet green; where there was snow in the
hollows; where there was ice in the brooks. But they didn't mind the
cold, for they wore their very thickest feather coats.
That night they nestled down together, and slept in a big pine-tree.
They found some dried berries on the bushes, for breakfast and
supper. It was very dark in the morning; it rained. But they did not
mind that; they liked it. They knew the rain would melt the snow, and
make the grass and flowers grow.
"But we must put on our waterproofs," they said.
Do birds wear waterproofs? Oh, yes! But they do not carry them in
trunks. When a bird wants to take a journey, he just flies off. He
does not have to pack a trunk. He has a tiny bag of oil under the tip
of his wings. This is his waterproof.
With his bill he takes out the oil and spreads it over his feathers.
The raindrops cannot go through this oil waterproof, but they roll
quickly off to the ground. After they had all put on their
waterproofs, they flew on and on again, through the rain.
They did not stay together that day. Part of them flew to the
northeast. By and by these came in sight of a big gilded dome.
"I know where we are," said one old robin. "That is Boston State
House, and right down there is our old nest!" and down they flew into
the Public Gardens. The Boston little men and women can see them there
any day, busy about their nests, and merry as birds can be.
Part of the birds flew to the northwest, to the hills and woods and
fields. They built their nests in the trees and on the ground. They
built them in barns and in chimneys. They hid them in the grass and in
the reeds by the brooks; and the little country children know where to
find them.
With bounding step and merry laugh
My little girl--five and a half--
Held in her hand a picture-card:
"See! mamma, see! I've tried so hard;
Look and see what the letters spell;
'Tis a reward for doing well.
I have been good a whole long week;
Not once, mamma, did teacher speak,
Or say from recess I must stay,
Because in school I'd tried to play.
Last week, you know, my card I lost
For giving Charlie's book a 'tost,'
And speaking out aloud in school;
I did not know 'twas 'gainst the rule.
Then teacher said, 'Edith come here.'
I went right to her, mamma dear,
And 'cause I hop-skipped down the aisle,
The scholars all began to smile.
That week I was so very good,
'Most got a card, and think I should
If I'd not hop-skipped down the aisle,
And made the other scholars smile.
But if I get one once in four,
School keeps so long, I'll get lots more."
Four little mice lived all alone
Where cats had been so long unknown;
They ate and slept without a fear
That any danger could be near.
One sunny day with brush and broom
They cleaned their pantry, swept their room,
Then made themselves as neat and fine
As if invited out to dine.
And then not knowing what to do,
They looked their cedar closet through
And found their gray coats growing thin:
So sat them down some yarn to spin,
Soon, through a chink to their surprise,
A cat looked in with hungry eyes--
"Shall I come in and cut your thread?"
"Oh, thank you, no!" they trembling said.
"Bow-wow-wow!" was the first thing Winny heard that morning. She
opened her eyes and there stood Finnette. Aunt Bertha had brought her
as a birthday gift for Winny from Paris.
Finnette was full of pretty tricks. She could stand on her hind legs
and dance. She could sing.
"Now, Finnette," Winny's mamma would say, "I will play and you shall
sing."
So Finnette would stand on her hind legs and sing such a droll little
tune. It sounded like "I love--I love--I love--do you?" Finnette
always helped Winny to put her dolls to bed. It was wonderful to see
her.
"Bring me Grandma Snowhair's cap, Finnette," Winny would say. And
Finnette would trot off and fetch it. She knew the doll's clothes just
as well as Winny did.
"Now, Finnette, I will have Glorianna's nightgown," said Winny again,
and Finnette would bring it.
When Winny got her dolls in bed, she always sang them to sleep, and
then Finnette would sing too. "I love--I love--I love--do you?"
Mamma used to like to peep in and see them. Winny always put her dolls
to bed at five o'clock. Finnette always knew when the clock struck
five, and off she would run to find Winny.
But one day she couldn't find her. She searched through the house and
garden, but Winny was not to be found. So Finnette lay down in the
library, and waited. Once she got up and trotted in and looked at the
dolls. She barked softly, as though she would say, "Be patient; your
mamma will be here soon."
But the little mamma did not come; so Finnette concluded to put the
dolls to bed herself. She laid Grandma Snowhair on the floor and then
with her teeth and paws she gently drew off her cap and gray silk
dress. She put on her nightgown, but she could not button it.
She undressed Glorianna, but she got her nightgown on upside down. She
put her legs into the sleeves. She did not try to put on aunt Sukey's
nightgown. She just wrapped her up in a blanket.
She tumbled the four small dolls into their beds anyhow. How surprised
and pleased and amused Winny was when she came home! There were the
dolls fast asleep, and their clothes all piled on a chair; and there
sat Finnette watching them. She gave the happiest little "bow-wow,"
when she saw Winny. She had not been able to eat or to sleep with the
care of all those dolls on her mind. Winny hugged and kissed her.
"You dear old darling Finnette," she said. "How sweet you have been to
my children. You shall have a silver collar, for you are my best
friend." Then Bridget brought Finnette her supper of bread and milk.
"Look! look!" said Ernest, "see the deer! It has got out of the deer
park. I did not know deer could run like that!"
The frightened creature was running down Washington street. He darted
in and out among the horses and carriages, and people. He leaped over
the heads of the children.
Ernest and his mother stopped to look; everybody stopped to look. On
and on he ran till he came to the river, then he leaped into the deep
water and was drowned. Was it not a pity? The pretty deer that Ernest
had fed so often on Boston Common! He almost cried when he thought of
it.
How many of you have ever seen deer? In many of the United States they
are still found in the woods. They are kept in almost all public
parks.
Deer are gentle creatures, and are easily tamed. But I think they are
happiest when they are free to roam the woods where they like.
They eat the tender grass in the spring, and sometimes, if they live
near farms, they break into the corn and wheat fields.
In the winter they eat the seed vessels of the wild rose, the hawthorn
buds, the brambles and leaves. They like acorns, and, in the South,
they eat the persimmons. The persimmon is a yellow plum. They feed in
the night.
In hot summer days they like to wade into the ponds and rivers, and
stand under water, all but their noses.
The young deer are called fawns; they are pretty spotted creatures.
The mother keeps them in a quiet place where she thinks the hunters
and dogs cannot get them; for men often hunt the wild deer. It is a
great pity to kill them for sport, is it not?
The deer hears quickly, and his scent is very keen too. When the
hunters are after him, how fleet he is! Sometimes he leaps into the
water and swims. Then the dogs lose the scent and cannot follow him.
The male deer sheds his horns every year.
When the horns are growing they look as if they were covered with
velvet.
Seen me? Of course you have seen me before.
I can't count the times I have been at your door.
Where do I live? Why, everywhere, here!
My name? Well, I own it is rather queer;
Some call me "good fellow," or "Fido," or "Tray,"
But I come just the same, whatever they say.
Am I ever lonesome? How can I be
When acquaintances everywhere whistle to me?
Hungry? That's something I've never yet known,
For friendly hands toss me sweet bits or a bone.
Cold? Oh, never! for doors everywhere
Are opened to shelter my silky brown hair,
For _I_ am everybody's dog!
And what do I give for this treatment so kind?
I drive home the lost cattle and sheep that I find;
With the children and babies I tenderly play,
And faithfully keep them from going astray.
And many an ill-natured tramp I have sent
Away from the game on which he was bent.
I can carry a basket or pail just the same
As a boy, and better than some I could name.
I bark in the night when danger is near,
And if I'm in the house no sleeper need fear.
What! be your own dog? Do you think 'twould be fair
To stay here with you when they all need my care?
No; I'll come every day for a minute or two
But now I must go for I've so much to do;
For _I_ am everybody's dog!
What a wonderful thing a bird's nest is! Even the simplest nests are
very wonderful. Some boys and girls collect birds' nests, and that is
very well, if you wait till the eggs are hatched, and the birds have
flown.
The ground sparrow builds a lovely little nest; and what a curious
nest is that of the barn swallow.
How many of you have seen the nest of the Baltimore oriole? She hangs
it upon the end of an elm branch, where it swings and dances in the
wind.
I have for you this time, the nest of an African bird. This little
bird belongs to the class called weavers. If you look at the nest,
you will understand why this bird is called a weaver bird.
See how skilfully the nest is woven out of twigs, and grasses, and
fibrous roots. There are many kinds of weaver birds, and each kind
builds a different nest. Sometime I shall show you another weaver
bird's nest.
It was the day set for the picnic by the lake. Two little white gowns,
and the boys' best coats, and the ribbons and the neck-ties, had been
joyfully laid out the night before.
But next morning it was not picnic weather. The sky was low and heavy.
By nine o'clock there were thick, dense, black clouds.
"I think we might go," said Flossie, "even if it does rain. We go to
school, lots o' days, when it rains."
Just then the big black raindrops fell upon the window-panes--"A great
pailful in every drop," said Tom.
"I want a picnic," wailed Susie, "and I can't have it."
"You shall have it," said papa; "we will have an indoors picnic, such
as my papa used to give me on a rainy day."
He led the way to the library. He took down a huge set of maps, a
great portfolio of engravings, and two or three heavy picture books.
"We will visit India," said he.
"Hurrah," said Tom. "Tiger hunts, elephant rides, jungles, snake
charmers, jolly old idols, and the Parsee merchants."
Tom knew very well what it meant when papa gave his mind up to turning
over picture books and talking as he turned.
They did have a good time; and before three o'clock it cleared away,
and though it was too late for the picnic they had planned, it was the
most perfect picnic weather, and as papa wanted to trim up cedars on
the knoll by the lake, they all went down. Papa and mamma played with
them for a while like an older brother and sister. They harnessed the
children in a "four-horse team," and drove up and down until the
"little colts" had had enough of fun and were glad to sit in the arbor
and watch papa trim trees.
Was it a shiny black cane with a gold head? No. I think you never saw
a cane like this one. It was made out of a small balm-of-Gilead-tree.
It belonged to John Reed. He taught school. He was eighteen years old.
When vacation came, John walked home. It was forty miles, and a pretty
long walk. But there were no railroads in those days, and John did not
like to ride in a stage-coach.
He thought he could walk more easily with a cane to help him. So he
made this cane I am going to tell you about.
When he got home he stuck this cane into the ground in the lane, and
then forgot all about it. But the cane was alive! When John stuck it
into the ground it began to drink up the water from the soil.
Tiny green leaves sprouted out all over it. John saw it one day. How
surprised he was! It grew all summer long. The next year the branches
began to grow; and year by year it grew larger and larger till it was
fifty years old.
Then John Reed was sixty-eight years old; the little children called
him "Grandpa Reed."
They called the great balm-of-Gilead-tree in the lane "Grandpa's
cane." They used to like to put their arms about it and look up into
the branches. They thought it wonderful that a cane should grow into
such a big tree.
Then came the great Civil War. Your mamma or auntie can tell you about
it. There were a great many wounded soldiers, and the people used to
send bandages and lint for their wounds. Do you know what lint is? It
is made of linen cloth. It is soft, like wool.
Grandpa Reed had a little granddaughter Clara. Clara saw the women and
girls making lint, and she wanted to make lint too. But aunt Mary said
she was not big enough to make lint.
"But I will tell you," said aunt Mary, "where you can find some nice
lint;" and she took her out to the great balm-of-Gilead-tree in the
lane.
Now you have all seen the soft, white pussy-willows. Well, the pussies
are the willow flowers; and the balm-of-Gilead-tree has pussies too.
But they are not soft and white; they are brown. They look like brown
caterpillars.
After the blossoms wither the seeds come. These seeds are covered
with wool like that on the dandelion's ball.
The wind blows this wool from off the trees, and there it was that
morning. The ground was white with it.
"There is the lint," said aunt Mary, and she gave Clara a bag to put
it in.
It took a great many bits of wool to fill the bag. But Clara was
patient, and worked diligently, and when the bag was full, she went
with aunt Mary to carry it to the soldiers' camp.
Clara gave it to the surgeon. He said the balm-of-Gilead lint was much
better than the linen lint. So "Grandpa's cane" and little Clara
helped the sick soldiers to get well again.
Down by the seashore Miss Lollipop sat,
Dropping the little white shells in her hat;
"See!" cried the darling, and shouted with glee,
"These pretty things were all waiting for me;
Waiting for me!"
Creeping and curving across the gray sand,
The wavelets came dancing to kiss the fair land,
Wooing with murmurs the flower-gemmed lea;
"Ah," cried Miss Pops, "they are whispering to me,
Whispering to me!"
Darting and flashing the gay sunbeams flew
Down from a heaven of midsummer blue,
Smiling and dimpling all over the sea;
"There," cried Miss Pops, "they are laughing at me,
Laughing at me!"
In the green meadows the tall grass stood fair,
Waving and tossing in sweet summer air,
Dipping and bending around her white knee;
"Look," cried Miss Pops, "it is bowing to me,
Bowing to me!"
Over the hills the sweet flower bells rang,
High in the tree tops the little birds sang.
--Tipsy-top bobolinks bent on a spree;
"Hark!" cried Miss Pops. "They are singing to me,
Singing to me!"
Deep in the roses the bumblebees flew,
Sipping their rations of honey and dew,
With jewel-necked humming-birds gorgeous to see;
"Now," cried Miss Pops, "they are shining for me,
Shining for me!"
Sweet little Happy Heart! Pure little soul!
Earth would be robbed of its darkness and dole
If with the faith of thy heart I could see
How much of God's world is fashioned for me!
Mr. Allen's early apples were almost ripe. They were uncommonly pretty
apples--yellow, streaked with red. How tempting they looked! Ripe
apples in August are always tempting.
Mr. Allen knew that, so he had put up a sign to warn the boys off. For
boys were very apt to help themselves to ripe apples. Somehow they
think that taking a few apples is not stealing.
So, as I said, Mr. Allen put up a board with these words on
it--"Trespassers prosecuted." That meant, if he caught any boy near
his apple-tree, he would carry him off to a justice of the peace, for
stealing.
Early one morning Tommy Tilden was walking through the lane. He had
just driven the cows to pasture and was coming home. He stopped and
looked at the apples. How good they did look, to be sure!
He searched on the ground to see if any had dropped into the lane.
But he could not find one. Then he looked at the tree again. "I wish I
had one," he thought.
Ah, Tommy, Tommy, the best thing for you to do is to run away as fast
as you can!
But Tommy didn't do any such thing. He kept looking at the apples and
wishing he had one. Then he thought, "I'll just climb up and look at
them."
And now, of course, you can guess what happened. Tommy climbed up, and
tried the apples with his thumb to see if they were ripe. Then he
reached out to get a fine big one, and the branch broke, and over he
went, with the branch, and the sign, and a shower of apples, into Mr.
Allen's garden.
The dog ran out barking furiously, and Mr. Allen, who was just eating
his breakfast, came out too, and little May Allen, to see what was the
matter.
How ashamed Tommy felt! "Trying to steal some of my apples, were you,
eh?" said Mr. Allen, and Tommy could not answer a word.
Little May Allen felt very sorry for him. "Can't you give him some
apples, papa?" she said.
"No," said Mr. Allen; "if he had come and asked me I would have given
him some gladly. But he ought to be ashamed to try to get them in this
way. But he can go. I sha'n't punish him."
So Tommy picked up his hat and went home. He told his mother all about
it.
"Tommy," she said, "you shouldn't have stood and looked at those
apples, and wished for them, when they were not yours. It is always
best to run away from temptation."
When mother was a young girl, she taught school in Illinois. Very few
people lived there at that time. The settlements were far apart. The
schoolhouse was built of rough logs, and the chinks were filled with
clay and straw. Instead of glass windows, they had oiled paper to let
in the light.
One night mother staid late at the schoolhouse, to help the girls trim
it with evergreens. It was almost dark when she started for home. She
walked very fast, as she felt lonely. Her way lay through a thick,
tall woods, and the path was narrow.
All at once she saw a big animal in front of her. What was it? A calf?
No; it was a big black bear.
Was she afraid? Of course she was afraid. Shouldn't you be afraid if
you met a big bear in the woods? She had an umbrella in her hand, and
she held the point close to the bear's nose, and opened and shut it as
fast as she could. She called him all the bad names she could think
of, and he walked off, growling.
He was a brave bear, wasn't he, to be afraid of an umbrella? Mother
hurried on, and just as she got to the edge of the woods, out he came
again. Then she opened the umbrella at him again, and shouted as loud
as she could, and away he went.
Mother was so tired and frightened she almost fainted when she got
home. "I don't believe it was a bear; it must have been neighbor
Clapp's big heifer," grandma said.
But just as she said it, they heard a loud squeal. They ran to the
door, and there was the bear carrying off a pig. He had jumped into
the pen and got it.
Aunt Stella seized the dinner horn and blew a loud blast. That was
the way they used to call the settlers together when anything was the
matter. There was a great rush for grandfather's house, and when the
men heard about the bear they said. "We must kill him as soon as
possible."
So they had a great hunt for him. They hunted all that night and the
next day. They found him, at last, sitting upon the stump of a hollow
tree, and they killed him.
What do you think they found in the hollow stump? Three little cubs.
The hunters brought the cubs to grandfather's farm, and uncle Stephen
kept one of them for a pet.
My little daughter Anna often asks to hear the story of how the "Bear
wanted to eat grandma." Last summer I took Anna to the Zoological
Garden. There we saw a family of bears.
One old bear was sitting in a tree, with his arms folded.
"Why, how pleasant he looks," said Anna. "I don't believe he would eat
anybody."
"No, I don't think he would," I said. "He is tame, and he would rather
have a sweet bun to eat than anything else."
"Anna, Anna!" shouted Harry. "Come quick, do! O such a!"--But mamma
clapped her hand right over his mouth, and he couldn't say another
word.
"Pat, pat, pat!" Anna heard a queer sound of feet on the veranda, and
in at the open windows trotted just the dearest little Shetland pony
all saddled and bridled. Harry was leading it. A card hung from the
saddle, and on it was printed, "A birthday gift for my little Anna,
from Grandpa."
"There! what do you think of that?" asked Harry.
"I think," said Anna, as soon as she could speak, "that no little girl
ever had such a splendid, _splendid_ grandpa as mine!"
"Isn't he, though!" said Harry. "And now I'll get out Boy Blue and
we'll ride over and thank him." Boy Blue is Harry's pony.
Do you know where these lovely little Shetland ponies live when they
are at home? They live in the northern islands of Great Britain.
Ralph was walking with papa in the fields, when he saw a red and black
butterfly. It was on a thistle.
"I will catch him," said Ralph. So he walked slowly up to the thistle
and put out his hand to catch the butterfly. But the butterfly spread
his wings and flew up in the air. In a moment he came back and lighted
on the thistle again.
Ralph wanted to try to catch him again, but papa said, "The butterfly
is eating his dinner."
"Does he eat the thistle?" asked Ralph.
"He eats the honey in the thistle," said papa. "We will sit down and I
will show you the honey. Each thistle head has a great many tiny
flowers. See, like these!" and papa pulled some of them out. Then he
took one of the blossoms between his thumb and finger. He pressed the
slender tube till Ralph saw a wee drop of honey at the end. Then Ralph
wanted to do the same. So he pressed one after the other of the purple
tubes and found a drop of honey in each.
"Does the butterfly squeeze them that way?" asked Ralph.
"No; he has no thumb and finger," said papa.
"How can he get the honey, then?" Ralph asked.
"He finds it with his long sucker, which reaches to the bottom of
these slender tubes."
"I wish he would eat this honey, papa, now I have got it all ready for
him," said Ralph. "I'll ask him."
So he walked slowly towards the butterfly, holding out the little
purple blossoms.
"Here's some honey all squeezed," he said softly; "don't you want it,
Butterfly?"
But the butterfly opened and shut his pretty spotted wings and then
flew away.
Ralph looked sorry. "Never mind," said papa, "he isn't used to having
little boys wait upon him. He likes to get his dinner himself."
Bright the sun! gay the flowers!
Gently falls the rain!
O the jolly, the blithesome hours,
Summer is come again!
Eggs in my nest, snails to eat,
A whole round world for my home,
I sing, I sing, so sweet, so sweet!
Summer again is come!
This is the letter a little English boy wrote to his American cousin
whom he never had seen. He wrote it on his slate in "print letters,"
and his sister Bess copied it on paper in "writing letters."
The words were spelled wrong on the slate. He worked four evenings to
write it all.
"You thought I would like to write letters because I am old like
you--ten years. But I am not a school-boy, like you. I am a home-boy.
I think home-boys don't study regular, and learn truly like
school-boys. Mother says she will tell your mother in her letter about
how I have been sick always.
"I think I would like to be a school-boy, but I wouldn't either.
School-boys are mean. If the new boy is lame and shy, they think that
is big fun. _I_ do not see how the tricks can be any fun then.
"If I was a school-boy I would not think it was fun to trip a lame
boy up. I would not think it fun to see him splash down backward into
a pool, and when he soused under and wet his lame back ice-cold, I
would not call, 'Cry-baby!'
"But that is what the school-boys did that day I went.
"So I can't write handsome letters. Do you trick new boys the first
day they come to your school in America? I have had twelve sore
throats since, and I wear a scarf in the house.
"I can knit, and I can mend, and I color pictures. But that is not
learning as school-boys learn. Girls are good to me, and there is a
school where they are all girls, but I think I would not like to go to
it--would you? Write again.
"Your cousin Tom."
Janey had been very sick. She had not left her room for a month. But
she was much better. Why, she was really hungry this morning! And here
comes mamma with a nice breakfast! She looked at the pleasant room
while she ate her toast and drank her milk.
"It isn't such an old, headachy place now," she said. "But please open
the windows and let all the sickness out." Then mamma put on the soft
red wrapper and knitted slippers that auntie had made for her to wear
on this very day. How pleasant it was to lie on the lounge with her
own dearest doll Belinda Button, tucked away under the afghan! She
could see the children at play through the open window and hear their
merry laughter.
"Mamma," she said, "I am so glad to be well. I want to make a present.
May I give some things to Bobby's lame sister? Not Belinda: she knows
how sick I have been, and would not leave me. But I want to give her
my red leather ball, and white rabbit and the picture book cousin
George sent me. And mamma, will you buy a new dolly who has no mother,
for Nellie?"
Was not that a kind thought of Janey's? and you may be sure Nellie had
them.
Rose is our old dog. Her hair is as curly as dandelion stems. Her tail
waves like a great feather duster.
When we say "Good dog," it thumps like grandpa's cane when he walks
up-stairs. Now I will tell you why we call her "Good old Rose."
One day papa sent Lily to the store. Lily is six years old. The store
is just beyond the railroad track.
"Rose, take care of Lily!" said papa. Rose wagged her tail for "yes,
sir!" and off they went. She trotted along by Lily's side. Lily felt
very grand to go to the store all alone. She didn't know that Rose was
taking care of her.
All at once Rose caught Lily's dress in her teeth. They were just
going to cross the track.
"Let me go!" said Lily. But Rose pulled her back hard. Lily looked up
and down the track. There was no train in sight. But Rose _heard_ it
shake the ground. "You shall let me go!" cried Lily. "Bad Rose!" and
she jerked the dress, and tore it out of Rose's teeth, and ran. Then
Rose jumped right at Lily and threw her down on the ground, and
dragged her back again.
Just that instant the train thundered round the curve. But Lily was
safe. How the men in the train cheered! how the ladies waved their
handkerchiefs! Rose hadn't any handkerchief, but she waved her tail,
and that is all a dog can do.
Wouldn't you pat her big head too, and call her "good old Rose?"
Aunt Patty lives in a little bit of a house. It has only two rooms. In
summer it is covered with vines--grapevines, morning glories and
flowering beans. It is cosey as a bird's nest and it is brimful of
pets.
If you should call on aunt Patty, just as soon as you stepped into
the yard, out would fly Gypsy, barking furiously. But he would not
bite you. O, no! He only barks to let aunt Patty know you are coming.
Then, when you opened the door, a sharp little voice would say
"Good-morning! walk in." That is the gray parrot, Nick. As you walked
into the kitchen, Pansy and Pickwick would come up to you and purr,
and put up their heads to be rubbed.
In one window you would see two canaries in a cage. In the other would
be a cage full of gay little African birds.
If it were winter there would be a cage of big birds. But in summer
aunt Patty keeps these big birds in the garden near the woodhouse.
Where did aunt Patty get so many pets? They were given to her.
Everybody knows that she likes pets. A sailor cousin once brought her
a turtle. It is quite big enough for you to ride on. This turtle lives
in the cellar in the winter, and in the garden in the summer.
Somebody sent her a small alligator once, but she did not keep it. She
likes pretty pets.
"Do your pets ever quarrel?" I asked aunt Patty once.
"Never," said aunt Patty. "Pansy and Pickwick, and the birds and
Gypsy, and Methusaleh are all good friends."
Methusaleh is the turtle.
Tommy sometimes visits his old nurse. Nurse lives in a tiny house and
keeps geese. Tommy is afraid of the geese. The gander hisses at him
and Tommy does not like that.
One day Nurse went into the goose-house and brought out ten little
goslings. Tommy took one of them in his hands. How pretty they were
with their pink feet and fluffy white feathers!
"To-morrow, they will go out and eat the tender grass," said Nurse.
"Then I shall catch them," said Tommy.
"The old gander won't let you," said Nurse.
"Pooh! who's afraid?" said Tommy very bravely.
So the next day Tommy tried to catch a gosling. Nurse had gone down
cellar and the gander was in the goose-house. But the mother-goose
hissed and the gander heard her and flew out of the goose-house after
Tommy.
Tommy ran, but the gander caught hold of his clothes and began to beat
Tommy's legs with his wings. The old goose screamed, and Tommy ran and
screamed, and the gander ran and screamed and whipped. What a noise
they made! and Nurse ran up from the cellar to see what the matter
was.
Just as Tommy went up the steps the gander bit both his red stockings.
Nurse picked Tommy up and shut the door so the gander could not get
in. Then she kissed Tommy, and cuddled him, and laughed, and said,
"Who's afraid?"
"I am," sobbed Tommy. "And I want that old gander shut up in the
barn. He isn't good for anything."
"Oh, yes, he is," said Nurse, "he takes care of the goslings."
The next day Tommy saw something very pretty. He was looking over the
gate. He did not dare to go out for fear the gander would bite him
again. He heard a gosling cry "peep, peep." The goose and gander heard
it too, and ran and looked down into a deep hole.
Tommy used to play this hole was his "well." Tommy saw the gander
stretch his long neck down into the hole and lift out a little
gosling, and put it carefully on the grass. Then the mother goose was
so pleased that she screamed outright.
And Tommy screamed too. "O Nurse, Nurse, that gander is good for
something. He lifted a gosling right out of my well. I saw him!"
We were all sitting in the parlor one evening last summer when in flew
a creature through the open window. Bump--bump, he went against the
wall and ceiling.
"A bat! a bat!" shrieked aunt Mary, and ran behind the door. Mamma
jumped up into a chair and gathered her skirts about her, just as
though it were a mouse. Grace and Mabel ran out of the Room, while
papa and Frank and Kate chased the bat.
The poor little bat fluttered about, and almost fell into the kerosene
lamp chimney. Then he got entangled in the window draperies. You know
a bat cannot see by a light any more than an owl can. He finally
tumbled behind the sofa where papa caught him.
Mamma then got down from the chair, aunt Mary came out from behind the
door, Grace and Mabel ventured in, and we all gathered about and
looked at the bat. How he panted!
"Think of being afraid of such a little creature as that," said Kate
scornfully.
"But he bites," said Grace. "Doesn't he, papa?"
"I don't think he would bite," said papa. "He's a good deal more
frightened than you were."
"What made him fly into the window then?" asked Grace.
"He is out after insects," replied papa. "He was dazzled by the light
from the window, and flew towards it, as all half-blind creatures
will."
Our little bats, the bats that live in cool countries, do not harm any
one. But there is a big bat, called the Vampire bat, that will do a
good deal of mischief, if he can get a chance.
The Vampire bat lives in the tropics. It is very comfortable, sleeping
out of doors, in the tropics.
A traveller will oftentimes swing his hammock on a tree, and sleep in
it all night. But he must be careful, and not sleep too soundly.
For a Vampire bat may find him; and if he does, he will bite the
traveller's toe and suck his blood; and when the traveller wakes in
the morning, he will feel weak and faint from loss of blood.
A bat does not perch, and tuck his head under his wing, and sleep like
a bird. He has some hooks on his wings, and he just hangs himself up
by those, and that's the way he sleeps!
Isn't this the very queerest creature you ever saw? He looks as though
he had a candle in each eye; and just look at his feet! His eyes are
round, like the eyes of owls. Like the owl, this monkey can see well
only in the night.
These monkeys are called night monkeys. Most other monkeys have long
forelegs, but this monkey's forelegs are short.
He is very small; his body is six inches long, his tail is over nine
inches.
These little creatures sleep in the daytime, and go out in search of
food, and to play in the night. They eat insects, lizards and crabs.
They are greedy creatures. They leap at one bound on their prey. They
live in warm countries. They make very nice pets.
Now Baby's asleep, mamma can sew--
"Rock-a-by-baby--by-lo, by-lo!"
Baby's asleep and Tommy can tell
Of the cat that was drown'd in the great big well.
"She had the weest, _teentiest_ toes,
And the leastest speck of a blackish nose,
With great, great eyes"--"Coo, coo! coo, coo!"
Baby's awake--and listening too!
Hurrah for old winter, he's coming at last!
The snow flakes are falling so thick and so fast!
Hurrah! Hurrah!
My skates I have mended, and painted my sled;
Now, boys, you will soon see this chap go ahead!
Hurrah! Hurrah!
I've jolly thick mittens, a brand-new fur cap;
Now, what does it matter if I get a rap?
Hurrah! Hurrah!
I've got such a secret! We've built us a fort!
But you must tell no one, 'twould spoil all our sport.
Hurrah! Hurrah!
Jack, Clement, and Robbie, are garrison men,
And we can defend it against any ten.
Hurrah! Hurrah!
We've made heaps of snowballs, each one round and hard,
They're hid away safe in the old schoolhouse yard.
Hurrah! Hurrah!
Pell-mell through the snow rush the merry boy crowd;
While the bare woodlands echo the hearty and loud
Hurrah! Hurrah!
"No, I _won't_!" said Moses. He felt pretty cross, for he did hate to
have his hair cut.
"Well, then," said his grandma, "you can't go to the candy party."
Moses thought a few moments, and then he jumped up and said, "Well,
grandma, cut it, then."
Now grandma wasn't much of a barber. She was apt to cut his hair so it
hung in scallops. But this time she wanted to cut it very even, as
Moses was going to a party. So she brought out an old wooden bowl that
just fitted his head.
Then she cut his hair straight to the edge of the bowl, and when she
took the bowl off, there it was beautifully even, and banged right
down over his forehead!
Then he put on the trousers and jacket grandma herself had made, and
his new shoes, and a blue bow where his collar met, and went off to
the party. It was Sally Poole's party and Sally was one of Moses'
playmates.
They boiled molasses in a kettle over a fire in the big kitchen
fireplace; then they poured it into buttered pans and set them out in
the snow for the candy to cool. It was great fun pulling it, and when
Moses went home, Sally gave him two sticks and a big braided piece.
"And I think, Moses," she said, "your hair is banged beautiful."
What do you think I did with all my beautiful Christmas cards?
I had saved ever and ever so many, and Easter and New Year's, and
Birthday cards, and a lot of Valentines. I knew I would get more this
Christmas, so I thought I would give these away.
Then I thought I would paste them in a scrapbook, or tack them up on
the wall instead. Then, I thought I would just keep them in a box
forever, and show them to my grandchildren; but, when aunt Nora told
me about the sick children at the hospital, then I thought I'd give my
cards to them. I just made up my mind I would, and so I did.
Aunt Nora took me to the hospital, and I wore my new red cloak and
hat. I think I looked sweet, too. The hospital is pretty big, and we
had to go down a long hall and a long pair of stairs. I began to be
frightened, 'cause suppose one of the doctors made a mistake and
thought I was sick!
So I held aunt Nora's hand tight until we came to a big room where
there were lots of beds and poor little sick boys and girls in them.
Some more children were playing around, and they were sick too. One of
them, a wee little mite, was eating bread and molasses, and her face
was all sticky. She wanted to kiss me.
A pretty nurse in a white cap came up and spoke to us, and aunt Nora
told her about my cards. She said I might give them round myself.
So I went up to the first cot, and, oh dear! there was such a sick
little girl in it. I asked her if she would like a card, and she
seemed so delighted that I gave her a beauty, with red and white
fringe. Then all the children said, "Gi'me one too, lady! Oh, lady!
gi'me one!"
Nobody ever called me "lady" before, but then I am most grown up now.
One child there was just as old as I am; only he was a boy, and he had
a big iron thing on his leg. When I gave him a card, he said, "Thank
you marm, and merry Christmas!"
Then they all waved their cards and cried "Merry Christmas! merry
Christmas!" as I went out of the door.
I hope I'll get ever so many cards this Christmas, so I can give them
to the hospital children. It's such fun!
One cold day in January Kitty Blake had dined with grandma and was on
her way home through the fields. Perhaps you wonder why Kitty should
walk in the fields when the snow was so deep. But there was a hard
crust on the snow and she could skip along over it without breaking
through. It was great fun.
Suddenly she stopped, for there in a slight hollow in the snow lay a
tiny bird.
"Poor little birdie, it must have frozen to death," said Kitty softly,
and a tear stood in her eye, for she has a tender heart for all little
creatures. Then she said "Oh!" and gave a start that sent the tears
tumbling over her muff for just that instant, one of the bird's legs
twitched and the tears would not stay back.
"P'r'aps it's still alive, after all;" she thought, and she picked it
up and tucked it into her muff. Her muff was lined with fur.
She reached home quite breathless, and when she took out the bird and
laid it on mamma's lap, it gave one little "Peep!" stood on its legs,
and then flew up into the ivy that ran all about the south bay window.
"What made it make b'lieve dead?" asked Kitty.
"It didn't make believe," said mamma. "I think it was dizzy. Birds
sometimes are dizzy. But if you had not found it, it would soon have
frozen to death."
Kitty named him "The Tramp," and he lived in the bay window with
mamma's plants. This bay window was shut off from the rest of the room
by glass doors. It was a sunny and fragrant home for the little
chickadee, and a lucky bird he was to have it just then.
For on the first day of February it began to snow and snowed three
days, and when it cleared there were piles and piles of snow.
Great flocks of birds then came about the house searching for food.
"We must feed them or they will die," said mamma. "The snow is so deep
they cannot find food."
So Kitty scattered meal and hemp seed on the snow and tied meaty bones
on the lilac and rose bushes, and there wasn't a moment of the day
when some blue jay, or snow bird, or chickadee, or robin, was not
picking up grain, or pecking at the bones.
"That is the way to have birds in winter!" said Kitty.
The Tramp did not seem to care a fig about his relations till one day
in March when a flock of chickadees flew past, and he fluttered
against the windows and begged to be let out.
Mamma opened the window and off he flew! Kitty sighed and said, "That
is the last of him, I suppose." But it wasn't.
One sunny May day Charley was sitting up in bed. Charley is Kitty's
brother. He had been sick and the window was open so he could breathe
the soft spring air. Suddenly a bird dropped upon the window sill and
began to whistle "Chick-a-dee-dee-dee!" so blithely and cock his head
at Charley.
"It's the Tramp!" said Charley; and sure enough it was! After that he
came almost every day. If the window was shut they opened it for him.
Charley used to hide hemp seed and sugar under the edge of the pillows
for the Tramp to find. He always found it. Sometimes he would tie
sugar up in a paper and the Tramp would peck at it until he got it
out.
He would perch on Charley's shoulder and eat seeds from his mouth.
He wanted to build a nest in an old letter box nailed up against a
wall. Ever so many birds, blue birds, wrens and sparrows wanted to
build in that box too.
The Tramp was a brave little fellow and a good fighter; but he never
would have driven the birds off, if Kitty hadn't helped him.
"I love all the birds," said Kitty, "but the Tramp is my very own
bird."
So he and his mate built a nest and raised a family of birds in peace,
and now Kitty and Charley call the old letter-box "The Tramp's Home."
Here is a picture of a little prince and two little princesses who
lived about two hundred years ago. They were the children of Charles
the First, king of England. I suppose they were very much like the
boys and girls of nowadays. They played and studied and had their
pets, just as children play and study now.
Matty Ellis had a new hat. It was a pretty white hat with a long,
curly white plume, and it was very becoming to her.
"Yes, I like it," she said to aunt Sarah. "But Nanny Rich has a hat
with two plumes."
"And I can tell you somebody who wears half a dozen or more," replied
aunt Sarah, "and that somebody is the ostrich himself."
Aunt Sarah tells Matty a great many interesting things, and she told
her about ostriches. She told how they live in hot sandy countries
like Africa.
They are so tall and have such long legs they can run as fast as, or
faster than, a horse.
They have their nests in a hollow on the ground. The Hottentot likes
ostrich eggs to eat. One ostrich egg is as big as sixteen hen's eggs.
So it makes a breakfast for a number of people. The Hottentot breaks a
hole in the small end of the egg, stirs up the contents with a stick,
and then sets it over the fire to cook. The shell is very thick and
hard, and the heat of the fire will not break it.
There is somebody else who likes ostrich eggs too, and that somebody
is a kind of fox. He comes when the ostrich is away and helps himself.
Sometimes the ostrich comes home and finds him at it.
Many other people like to wear ostrich plumes as well as Matty. So
there is a large trade in them. The wild ostrich does not supply
feathers enough for the market, so ostriches are now raised like
turkeys and hens. This business is called "ostrich farming." The
ostriches are kept in large yards, and the plumes are taken out every
year.
Aunt Sarah told all this to Matty. "And so," said Matty, stroking the
long white plume, "this feather has ridden on the back of an ostrich
in Africa; I wish it could tell me what it has seen."
It was the very nicest, whitest goose of the whole flock, and there it
was--dead! Who had killed it? was the question. Everybody said it must
have been Bose; and why? Because Bose liked to tease the geese.
Sometimes he jumped from behind a bush and frightened them. Sometimes
when they were standing at their trough eating, he ran at them, just
for the fun of seeing them run.
"I don't think he meant to kill it," said the grandpa.
"Very likely not," said the father, "but I must teach him not to run
at the geese. Come here, sir," he said to Bose.
Bose felt very badly. He crawled slowly along. He couldn't say, "I
didn't do it; please don't whip me," as a little boy or girl can. He
could only look up to his master with soft, begging eyes. But little
Patsy was looking in at the door. Little Patsy loves Bose dearly; and
of all the family Bose best loves Patsy. They are always playing
together.
"Oh, please don't whip Bose," cried Patsy. "I don't believe he did it.
Nobody saw him do it," and she begged so hard her father said he would
only tie Bose up. He would not whip him till he was sure he had killed
the goose. That night Patsy cried herself to sleep. It almost broke
her heart to think that on the morrow Bose might have to be whipped.
Suddenly in the night she heard a queer, soft voice say, "I don't
believe he did it. I wouldn't kill a goose." Patsy opened her eyes and
found herself in a room full of dogs. The voice came from a wee doggie
wrapped in an eider down quilt.
"Very good reason why; you couldn't," barked another little fellow. He
had a head that looked as if it were bald, and large soft ears, and he
was peeping out of a basket.
"Raw goose, faugh!" said a dainty doggie, who had a blanket pinned
carefully around him. "I like my poultry well picked and cooked."
"That's so. So do I," rejoined a fierce scrap of a dog. He wore a
collar and little silver locket, and cocked his ears.
"People are always saying dogs do things," said a tousled terrier,
whose hair had tumbled over his eyes, so he couldn't see a thing. "The
cat ate the cream the other day and cook said I did it. I hate cooks."
A grave-looking dog opened his mouth and spoke. He must have been a
lawyer among dogs. Patsy thought he looked like Judge Drake. He spoke
slowly. "If Bose had never chased the geese even in play, his master
would never have suspected him. A great deal depends on a dog's
character. But I don't think he killed the goose."
"I _know_ he didn't," spoke up a big splendid dog. "Bose is a good
fellow!" Then all the dogs barked out, "Hear! hear!" so loudly that
Patsy awoke. The dogs had vanished; the morning sun was shining. She
heard her father call, "Patsy, come and see the fox! We've trapped the
rogue. It was he that killed the goose!"
He belongs to a baker. His master went into a restaurant to deliver
some pies. I was sitting at a window opposite. He stayed so long in
the place that I thought he had forgotten his faithful beast.
After a while he came out carrying a great mug full of foaming beer.
There were two other men with him. All their faces were red, and they
walked unsteadily, and they were laughing loud, and shouting. Then the
baker went up to his beautiful horse, and offered him the beer to
drink.
Do you suppose he took it? No, indeed! He gave it one sniff from his
smooth, brown nostrils. Then he turned his head away with a jerk so
sudden that he knocked the glass, beer and all, upon the pavement. He
looked at his master as if to say, "Don't insult me again in that way,
sir!"
So his bad master had to pay for both the beer and the glass.
Wise old horse, he was not afraid to give his opinion of beer.
High and low
The spring winds blow!
They take the kites that the boys have made,
And carry them off high into the air;
They snatch the little girls' hats away,
And toss and tangle their flowing hair.
High and low
The summer winds blow!
They dance and play with the garden flowers,
And bend the grasses and yellow grain;
They rock the bird in her hanging nest,
And dash the rain on the window-pane.
High and low
The autumn winds blow!
They frighten the bees and blossoms away,
And whirl the dry leaves over the ground;
They shake the branches of all the trees,
And scatter ripe nuts and apples around.
High and low
The winter winds blow!
They fill the hollows with drifts of snow,
And sweep on the hills a pathway clear;
They hurry the children along to school,
And whistle a song for the happy New Year.
Bow-wow! Who are you? I am only a little dog. My name is Dime. I am
not a cross dog. I have been a pet dog all my life. Shall I tell you
what I can do? I can sit up and beg. I can shake hands. I can jump
over a stick, O yes; and I can run very fast. I can run as fast as
Pomp, the baker's dog; and Pomp is a big dog.
I like to run races with Pomp. He never bites a little dog. We like to
run after birds. But we never catch any birds. They fly away when we
come near. I wonder how the birds fly. Pomp and I cannot fly.
My master has a cow. Her name is Betty. She is a good cow. She gives
nice, white milk. I do not care much for milk. I like a bone better.
But old Tab, the cat, likes milk. I like to see Tab drink milk. She
laps it up very fast.
I drive Betty to pasture every day. John goes with me to shut the
gate. John is the boy who milks the cow. I wish I could open and shut
that gate. Then John would not go to the pasture. I should like to go
all alone. I think it would be fine.
I take good care of Betty. When any one comes near her, I say,
"Bow-wow" very sharply.
When Bobby Smart was six years old, he was left to the care of his
Uncle James, who lived in the country. His aunt took him to his future
home, and at the depot he saw his uncle for the first time.
Bobby was lonely and sad; his uncle often treated him with harshness
and even cruelty. The cold winter had come on early. Bobby was the
only boy about the farm, and he had to work very hard. His clothing
was unfit for the winter weather, and he often suffered from the cold.
Among the duties which this poor boy had to perform was that of
tending a flock of sheep. One afternoon, when there were signs of a
snow-storm, he was sent to drive the flock to the barn. He started for
the field, but his clothes were so thin that he was benumbed by the
intense cold. He sat down on a large rock to rest himself. He felt
strangely tired and cold. In a little while he began to feel drowsy.
Then he thought it was so nice and comfortable that he would stay
there awhile. In a very few moments he was asleep, and perhaps
dreaming.
Suddenly he was aroused by a tremendous blow which sent him spinning
from his perch on the rock to the ground. Looking about him, he saw an
old ram near by. The creature looked as though he had been doing
mischief, and Bobby was no longer at a loss to know where the blow
came from; but he thought the attack was an accident, and in a short
time he was again in the land of Nod.
Again the ram very rudely tumbled him over into the snow. He was now
wide awake, and provoked at the attack of the beast. He began to
search for a stick to chastise his enemy. The ram understood his
intention, for he turned upon Bobby as if to finish the poor boy.
Bobby was forced to take to his heels, and ran towards home.
The ram chased him, while the rest of the flock followed after their
leader. The inmates of the farm-house were surprised to see Bobby
rushing towards the house as fast as his little legs would allow him.
His hair was streaming in the wind, and he was very much terrified.
Close upon him was the old ram, kicking up his heels in his anger.
Behind him could be seen a straggling line of sheep doing their best
to keep up.
Bobby won the race, however. His uncle came out in time to turn the
flock into the barn. It was a long time before Bobby would venture
near the ram again.
Bobby knows now that but for the efforts of that old ram in knocking
him from his seat on that bitterly cold day he would have been among
the angels in a very short time. The sleepy feeling which overcame him
would have ended in death.
Bobby declares that the ram knew all the time what ailed him, and that
he butted him from the rock on purpose. I cannot explain it, but do
know that "God moves in a mysterious way his wonders to perform."
There was only a little piece of garden belonging to Lily's home in
the city. In the bright spring days she went out there, and watched to
see if any flowers came up. She felt happy when she found the first
blades of grass.
The poet sings that "his heart dances with the daffodils." Lily's
heart danced, one morning, when she found a dandelion among the
grasses in her yard,--a real yellow dandelion, with all its golden
petals spread out.
Just then, one of her playmates looked over the fence, and put out her
hand.
"Do give it to me," she said. "I sha'n't like you a bit, if you don't:
I shall think you are just as stingy--"
"But it's all I have," said Lily; "I can't give it away. I can't. Wait
till to-morrow, and there'll be some more out. They're growing.
There'll be some all round to-morrow or next week."
"To-morrow! I want it now, to-day," said her friend, "to-day's better
than to-morrow."
Lily looked at the child and then at the dandelion. "I suppose it
would be mean to keep it," she said, "but it is so lovely--_can't_ you
wait?"
"Oh, well, keep it, you stingy girl!"
"Come and pick it yourself, then," said Lily, with tears in her eyes.
The next day, when Lily went into the yard, there were a dozen golden
dandelions, like stars in the grass, and a little blue violet was
blooming all alone by itself.
Where is the honey-bee?
Where has the swallow flown?
Only the chickadee
Chirrups his song alone.
Where is the bobolink,
Bubbling with merriment?
What was the road, think,
The gadding fire-fly went?
Whither flew the little wings
Grown in green forest aisles?
Where are the pretty things
That blossomed miles on miles?
A few weeks ago, as I was crossing a railroad track just outside of
the city, a little goat stepped before me. With a sad cry, she seemed
to ask me to stop. I turned aside to pass on, but she kept brushing
against me, until I finally decided to find out what she wanted.
The goat had wandered from her usual browsing place. In crossing the
railroad track she had caught her chain on a rail, and could not get
away. I stooped down and let her loose. Then she pressed against me as
if to thank me, and bounded off quickly to her old pasture.
If we would always listen to the cries of animals in distress, we
might do a great deal of good. Just after I had released the goat, a
train of cars came rushing along, and she would certainly have been
killed if I had not attended to her.
It has often been remarked that in the bird world the rule is for the
males to have the brilliant plumage, with all the beautiful colors and
for the females to be the dowdy ones--a rule which would entail a
revolution in fashions, startling and ludicrous, if it were to be
introduced for variety among our own kind. Again, gaily-dressed birds
have the least pleasing song--the screaming jay bearing an unfavorable
comparison with the thrush--and the modestly-attired nightingale
having furnished, in all ages, a brilliant example of virtue
unadorned. The nightingale, however, leaving before the climate has
become objectionable, we must praise its musical accomplishments
rather as being those of a distinguished guest, or foreign _prima
donna_, than of an indigenous artist. But we have another bird who
_is_ always here, facing winter's blasts in addition to summer's
bloom, who in voice stands unrivaled; no competitor approaching any
where near him for fluency, richness, and liquid melody of song--to
wit, the blackbird.
This negro melodist seldom spares his lungs at all until winter is far
advanced into its New Year months; and even amid the bitter mornings
of January, his rich, unfaltering notes can sometimes be heard. His
coat is a glossy black, always cleanly brushed, and in the case of one
family, sometimes called the "Red-wing," with a gorgeous scarlet lapel
on either side.
Two little rabbits out in the sun;
One gathered food, the other had none.
"Time enough yet," his constant refrain;
"Summer is still just on the wane."
Listen, my child, while I tell you his fate:
He roused him at last, but he roused him too late.
Down fell the snow from a pitiless cloud,
And gave little rabbit a spotless white shroud.
Two little boys in a school-room were placed;
One always perfect, the other disgraced.
"Time enough yet for my learning," he said;
"I will climb by-and-by, from the foot to the head."
Listen, my darling--their locks are turned gray;
One, as a governor, sitteth to-day.
The other, a pauper, looks out at the door
Of the alms-house, and idles his days as of yore.
Two kinds of people we meet every day;
One is at work, the other at play,
Living uncared for, dying unknown.--
The busiest hive hath ever a drone.
Tell me, my child, if the rabbits have taught,
The lesson I longed to impart in your thought.
Answer me this, and my story is done,
Which of the two will you be, little one?
Dick Sly was the smartest mouse in Mousetown. He knew any kind of a
new trap that was set to catch him, and he always warned the rest. The
houses in Mousetown are called "holes," you know. Next to the hole
where Dick lived with his parents was the hole where pretty Nan Spry
lived. She could run faster than any mouse in Mousetown; even Dick
could not catch her, if she tried to run away from him. At last it was
told in Mousetown that Dick and Nan were to be married, and every body
said, "What a grand pair they'll make." Judge Mouse, who married them,
put on his best gold spectacles, and they were married on a big
wedding cake, which some folks called a "cheese." Every one in
Mousetown had a bit of it, and declared it to be the best wedding cake
they had ever eaten.
They took the little London girl, from out the city street,
To where the grass was growing green, the birds were singing sweet;
And every thing along the road, so filled her with surprise,
The look of wonder fixed itself, within her violet eyes.
The breezes ran to welcome her; they kissed her on each cheek,
And tried in every way they could, their ecstacy to speak,
Inviting her to romp with them, and tumbling up her curls,
Expecting she would laugh or scold, like other little girls.
But she didn't--no she didn't; for this crippled little child
Had lived within a dingy court, where sunshine never smiled;
And for weary, weary days and months, the little one had lain
Confined within a narrow room, and on a couch of pain.
The out-door world was strange to her--the broad expanse of sky,
The soft, green grass, the pretty flowers, the stream that trickled by;
But all at once she saw a sight, that made her hold her breath,
And shake and tremble as if she were frightened near to death.
Oh, like some horrid monster, of which the child had dreamed,
With nodding head, and waving arms, the angry creature seemed;
It threatened her, it mocked at her, with gestures and grimace
That made her shrink with terror, from its serpent-like embrace.
They kissed the trembling little one; they held her in their arms,
And tried in every way they could to quiet her alarms,
And said, "Oh, what a foolish little girl you are, to be
So nervous and so terrified, at nothing but a tree!"
They made her go up close to it, and put her arms around
The trunk, and see how firmly it was fastened in the ground;
They told her all about the roots, that clung down deeper yet,
And spoke of other curious things, she never would forget.
Oh, I have heard of many, very many girls and boys
Who have to do without the sight, of pretty books and toys--
Who have never seen the ocean; but the saddest thought to me
Is that any where there lives a child, who never saw a tree.
Knock! Knock! Knock! I've been before this block
More than half an hour, I should say;
I am standing in the sun, while Miss Lucy lingers on,
Talking of the fashions of the day.
It is a trick you know, she taught me long ago,
But now I am in earnest, not in play;
And the world is very wide, to a horse that isn't tied,
I've a mind to go and ask the price of hay.
There's a nail in my shoe that needs fixing too,
And I want a drink more than I can say;
How I could run, with my dandy harness on!
But it's such a mean thing to run away.
Rap! Tap! Tap! That's enough to break a nap--
There she comes, and is laughing at the way
I brought her to the door, when she wouldn't come before,
That's a trick worth playing any day.
It was recess at the school-house at the cross roads, and three
country girls gathered round a companion, whose unhappy face showed
that something had gone wrong.
"Is this your last day at school, Lucindy?" asked Carrie Hess, a girl
of fifteen, and the eldest of the three sisters.
"Yes, this is my last day, thanks to the summer boarders. I can't bear
to think of them. I hate them!"
"Will you have to work harder than you do now?" asked Freda, who was
next younger to Carrie.
"I don't mind the work so much as I do their impudent airs, and their
stuck-up ways. I wont be ordered around, and if Auntie thinks I'm
going to be a black slave, she'll find she's mistaken."
Lucindy's face flushed, and she appeared to be greatly in earnest.
"I'd be glad to have them come to our house, they have such nice
clothes," said Lena, the youngest and most mischievous.
"Yes, it's very nice, I must say, to go around in old duds, and have a
girl that's not a whit better in any way than you, only she's been to
a city school and has a rich father, turn up her nose at you, and
perhaps make fun of you, with her white dresses and her silk dresses,
and her gaiter boots."
"Can't we come to your house any more? Can't we come to play?" asked
Carrie.
"Oh, can't we come?" said the other two, almost in a breath.
"No, Auntie told me this morning, that I must tell you and the rest of
the girls, that it wouldn't be convenient to have you come, as you
have done; you are not stylish enough for Miss Hattie Randolph to
associate with, I suppose."
The girls looked really disappointed. Lucindy was a great favorite,
and a leader, fearless and successful in all escapades that required
originality and coolness, and her company would be sorely missed. Her
aunt had indulged her in all the dress and amusement she could afford,
and her companions had always been welcome to visit at the house, but
now there was a necessity for her services, and play could not be
indulged in so often for the rest of the summer, as the household
needed the avails, if not the presence of summer boarders.
"Is she older than we?" asked Carrie.
"No, but she's lived all her life in the city, and feels above
everybody. She and her brother and her mother will just take
possession of our piazza and door-yard, and our swing; and I can wash
dishes, and sit on the back door-step, and never see a girl from one
month's end to another." Here Lucindy burst out crying.
"It's too bad," said Carrie.
The little Lena, ever fertile in invention, crept near, and putting
her arms around Lucindy's neck, whispered:
"We'll come to see you on the sly, and we can go down in the fields
and have fun, when your Auntie goes out for an afternoon."
"I wish you would," said Lucindy. "And I'll bring down some cake and
pickles, and some honey, and we'll have a pic-nic in spite of Mrs.
Randolph!"
This was a solution of the unhappy problem, and it seemed to throw a
ray of sunlight slantwise into the gloomy picture of the coming
summer.
The progress of the afternoon at the school-house was not marked by
any unusual occurrence, and at the close, the little company of
schoolmates proceeded together, until they came to the road leading to
Lucindy's home. Here they parted, with many professions of everlasting
friendship; Lucindy, walking backwards, watched her companions until
the turn in the road hid them from view.
Then she sat down upon a bank by the roadside under an old tree.
Throwing her slate and books down on the grass, she snatched a few
daisies that grew near, and thought of many things of a disquieting
nature, pulling the flowers to pieces.
"I feel mad enough to run away!" she thought. "I could earn my living
easy enough in the city, and not have to work so hard either. Miss
Hunter can't teach me any thing more. I've learned all she knows. It's
just too bad not to be able to get more education. I'll just take my
own way, if Auntie crowds me too much. I don't care if she don't like
it. If my father and mother were alive, she wouldn't be my boss. I can
get on in another place with what I know about a good many things.
"But oh, that girl that's coming has so much better times than I.
Those lovely city schools! no one can help learning there, they take
such pains with you."
She looked down the road upon which the slanting red light of the
declining sun was shining, and there she saw a cloud of dust. This
road was not a great thoroughfare, and she knew that was the stage,
and it probably would bring the undesired summer guests.
She shrank visibly back into the shadow of the tree as it came on, and
smoothed out her faded calico dress and pulled her sun-bonnet farther
over her face.
The coach came rolling past, and a girl in the back seat directed the
attention of a fashionably-dressed lady to herself, she thought, and
laughed as though immensely pleased, at the same time pointing at her.
A little boy, who sat in the front seat with the driver, and who was
playing upon a harmonica, stopped, and looking in her direction,
laughed too.
"It's my outlandish sun-bonnet they're making fun of," she thought. "I
suppose this is the beginning of it."
Now this ungentle girl was mistaken in her surmise, as she was about
many things that caused her unhappiness. What the people in the stage
were really interested and amused with were a couple of lambs in the
field back of Lucindy, and their playful gyrations were a novel sight
to them, and they had come for the very purpose of being pleased with
country sights and experiences. Lucindy felt sure these were the
summer boarders, and, taking a short cut across the fields, arrived at
her aunt's just as the guests were alighting.
Lucindy stood at the back corner of the house, and heard the sprightly
talk of Mrs. Randolph and the merry laugh of the daughter, as her aunt
bade them welcome, and she knew they were being conducted to the upper
rooms that had been prepared with such thoughtful reference to their
comfort.
Her aunt came down very soon, and seeing Lucindy, bade her wash her
hands and smooth her hair, and put on a white apron, and prepare to
get ready the tea. This duty Lucindy had always done, and a little
curiosity, mingled with her other feelings, came to her, as to how the
boarders would like her aunt's puffy biscuit, and if the cold custard
and raspberry jam wouldn't be to their taste. If coffee and fricasseed
chicken would not be just the thing after an all-day ride, and
remarked to herself: "If they don't like such fare, let them go where
they'll get better."
The tea passed off with great good feeling; the new people making a
most favorable impression upon her aunt, and impressing Lucindy with
the discovery that polite manners were a recommend to strangers, for
her aunt made gratified remarks from time to time as she came into the
kitchen. Lucindy would not wait upon the table the first evening, a
convenient head-ache being the excuse.
Mrs. Gimson was a most kindly disposed person, and endeavored, in
every way, to make the time pass pleasantly to her guests; but all she
could say in their favor did nothing toward disposing the mind of her
niece to regard them with any toleration. She performed the household
duties that fell to her with a stolid indifference, or with an openly
expressed reluctance, and her aunt bore all kindly, explaining and
smoothing away what she could, promising Lucindy that she should have
a nice present of money when the guests departed.
Hattie Randolph had not taken any notice of her, never really having
seen her, for Lucindy had positively refused to wait upon the table;
and had kept herself in the back-ground, thus making her life at home
more of a discipline than was necessary. She envied Hattie's graceful
ways and refined conversation; and her apparel was a revelation, not
of beauty, but of another source of jealous envy to the country girl,
for in putting the guests' rooms in order, she examined, critically,
the pretty things in the wardrobe.
The city people found so much to interest them in the beauties of the
surrounding neighborhood, that they were out nearly all the time, and
when the evening came, Mrs. Randolph, with her son and daughter, made
a pleasant addition to Mrs. Gimson's parlors, with their graceful
talk, and numberless resources of entertainment.
Lucindy, observant and sullen, kept herself informed of all their
movements, and was continually having the blush brought to her cheek
and the bitterness of comparison to her heart, as she noted the wide
difference there was between herself and them. It never once occurred
to this foolish girl, that this difference was growing more and more
every day, by the fostering of pride and an ignorant stubbornness,
which prevented her, utterly, from ever cultivating their envied
characteristics.
It was a long time since she had seen any of her playmates from the
school, but by an ingenious contrivance, that had been thought out by
Lucindy, a tin box had been inserted into an old tree in a fence
corner, about midway between her home and the school-house, and in
this they deposited their notes to each other.
This was a solace to Lucindy, as all the happenings at the school
could be reported, and many a mis-spelled, soiled missive found its
way to the eager hands of the absent one. Not less interesting was the
news as to the doings of the boarders. Nothing, however trivial, that
happened not to accord with Lucindy's notions was overlooked in her
setting forth of grievances, and she found ready sympathizers in the
Hess girls. Carrie Hess stood under the old tree, one lovely morning,
overstaying her time in doing so, as the warning bell had rung at the
school-house, reading a note she had taken from the tree post-office.
Among other things, it communicated the welcome news, that herself and
sisters might come to the pretty knoll behind the house that
afternoon, and that Lucindy would take the occasion to make a holiday
for herself, as her aunt was going, after dinner, to look up fresh
butter and eggs, and would be gone until near tea time.
Mrs. Randolph had hired a team, and with her family would be gone the
same length of time, for a ride.
Carrie took a race to school, very much elated at the prospect of
enjoying Lucindy's company once more. Recess came, and after eating
their very generous lunch, they prepared to quietly put a considerable
distance between themselves and the precincts over which Miss Hunter's
authority extended. They were "skipping," as they termed it, and as
their parents would not know of it, they reveled in the forbidden
freedom. They proceeded over fences and across stubble fields, and
soon reached the coveted meeting-place. A wide-spreading tree, with a
wreath of apples upon it, just turning to a ruddy hue, was almost
completely surrounded at its trunk with hazel bushes, but on one side
they did not grow; this was away from the house, and toward the wheat
field. It was a natural bower, and into this they crept to await the
coming of Lucindy.
They were not kept long in suspense, and when she appeared what a
hugging and kissing were gone through with!
"Have your boarders gone for their ride?" asked Carrie.
"Yes, and I thought they'd never get off. Old Mrs. Randolph fusses so,
you'd think she was going to a party every time she goes to ride. I
wonder who she expects to see on a country road?"
"Sure enough. How was the girl dressed, Lu?"
"Oh, she had on a light check silk, and a lovely brown jockey, trimmed
with pink satin ribbon rosettes and long ends at the back, and a
lovely, wide collar."
"Don't you like her better than her mother?" asked Lena.
"Well, she doesn't put on as many airs as her mother, and she's acted,
two or three times, as if she were going to speak to me, but I managed
not to let her. I don't want her acquaintance. I don't want any of her
coming down to me!"
"I suppose they have nice things, that they've brought with them, in
their rooms," said Carrie.
"Yes, Mrs. Randolph has an elegant blue satin pin-cushion, with
morning-glories and apple-blossoms painted on it, and a dressing-case
with white ivory combs and brushes, and they do your hair up lovely,
for I fixed mine in her room yesterday with them." This caused much
merriment.
Lucindy proceeded to take from her pocket a pack of children's cards,
illuminated with gaily-dressed ladies and gentlemen, and queer-looking
figures of all kinds. These caused a sensation; they looked
incredulously at Lucindy, as she said:
"These are the things that make them laugh evenings. If we knew how to
play them, we could have some of their kind of fun."
They passed them to one another and examined them. They threw them
aside presently, and returned to the subject of never-failing
interest--the wardrobe of the boarders.
Carrie and Lena intimated more than once, that if they could only see
something that city people really considered elegant, they would be
satisfied, and forever indebted to Lucindy for the sight.
"Oh, dear, if that will please you so much," said Lucindy, entirely
willing to gratify them, "I'll go and get one of Mrs. Randolph's
prettiest dresses and show you. It wont take me a minute."
"Oh, do, Lucindy! we're just crazy to see it! She'll never know it,"
said Carrie, with eagerness.
Lucindy had no scruples whatever in procuring so coveted a pleasure
for her dear friends. She ran back to the house and up into Mrs.
Randolph's room. She fumbled over the dresses, and thinking it was as
well to take out two or three, that they might feast their eyes upon a
variety, she piled two silk dresses and an India mull upon her arm,
and hurried out.
They dragged considerably upon the dusty path, but this was not
noticed, and the wild delight of the girls, when they really had them
in their hands, amply repaid Lucindy for any risk, she thought.
They fingered them over, the bead embroideries and lace trimmings, and
examined the fashion of each with untiring interest.
"Let's put them on!" said Carrie, "and see how we would look in
them."
"We'll look sweetly stylish," said Freda.
"Oh, do let us, Lucindy! Mrs. Randolph wont be back until evening.
It'll be such fun!" insisted Carrie.
"All right, let us; I don't care how much fun we have with them, the
more the better," returned Lucindy. No sooner said than done; over
their clothing they stretched the dresses, and jerked and settled them
into the proper set. Shouts of laughter greeted every ridiculous pose
and awkward stumble, and certainly nothing could be more provocative
of merriment than their appearance. They trailed the dresses over the
stubble in mock dignity; they improvised a dance, and went through all
the grotesque changes they could invent. Their comments and jokes were
most spicy and personal, and in all Lucindy led.
After a good time enjoyed in this way, the fun lost its point and
novelty, and they threw the dresses in a heap on the grass, and sat
and chatted over the gossip connected with the school at the cross
roads. The afternoon was wearing on, and Lucindy thought it time to
produce her good things, and taking up the dresses, ran along to the
house.
In getting through the bars she dropped the mull overskirt and did not
perceive her loss. Gretchen saw it, and running after, brought it
back. Lucindy hung the dresses up in their places, certainly not
improved by the airing they had had; but chancing to look out of an
upper window, she was horrified to see down the road the identical
team that Mrs. Randolph had hired, and as true as the world, they were
coming home!
She rushed down, and abandoning the lunch, ran as fast as she could to
the field, and as she approached, this was the sight that met her
gaze:
Gretchen was strutting about with a dock leaf held over her head for a
parasol, and trailing the beautiful mull overskirt on the ground,
endeavoring to realize the feelings of a fine lady in a trailed dress.
"Gretchen! Gretchen!" screamed Lucindy, as loudly as she dared. "Hide
it! hide it! Mrs. Randolph has come home!"
Carrie jumped, and lifting Gretchen from it, secured the skirt, and
Lucindy grasped it and rolled it in a small ball and hid it in the
hazel bushes. Then they held a hurried consultation, and decided it
was best for Lucindy to go back immediately; but, as it was now
impossible to restore the skirt to its place in the wardrobe, they
urged her to put it in some unfrequented spot, until a favorable
opportunity came to get it back. Lucindy now feared her aunt would
arrive without warning, and, although loth to part without the long
anticipated treat, they walked quickly down the path by the fence
toward the road.
"What on the face of the earth will I ever do with this thing?"
whispered Lucindy, for the first time betraying fear. "I can't get it
back to-night, that's as plain as the nose on your face. Oh, grief!
she may inquire after it as soon as I go in! It'll be just like my
luck for her to want to wear it to-night. Maybe she expects some one
to spend the evening with them, and that's what brought them back so
early. Let me see--Auntie will find it if I put it anywhere about the
house or barn; I must not be found out in this, because if I am,
Auntie wont give me the present she promised. I'll tell you, Carrie,
you take it and put it down the hole in the tree, under the tin box.
No one has ever found out that place; it will be safe there until I go
for it to-morrow."
This was immediately decided upon, and the girls went sulkily home.
The skirt was forced down into the tree, and the tin box placed on
top, and they trudged slowly homeward.
As Lucindy approached the house, she began to see more and more the
serious dilemma in which she was placed, and her face hardened visibly
as she thought.
"I'll deny the whole thing if I'm cornered; perhaps Mrs. Randolph will
live through the disappointment of not wearing her dress for once. I
have to live all the time without such dresses."
Just then she heard her aunt calling her, and she knew that some
unlooked-for occasion had brought them home before evening.
"Lucindy, we must hurry up the tea; the folks are going to spend the
evening at Judge Brander's. The team is waiting to take them there.
Mrs. Randolph saw me in the village, and told me."
Lucindy did not answer, but went in and about her duties as usual.
Presently Mrs. Randolph called for Mrs. Gimson to come up stairs, as
she wished to speak to her. Lucindy felt that now the discovery had
been made, and strengthening her purpose, to deny all, worked on,
quietly waiting for developments.
In a few moments, her aunt came down in great excitement, and told her
that someone had been in the house, while they were away, and had
stolen Mrs. Randolph's elegant India mull overskirt, and had almost
ruined her other dresses, as the trimmings were broken and destroyed,
and some of them were gone entirely.
"It must have been when I went for water; I noticed that there were
two tramps going down the road, a man and woman."
"Oh, Lucindy, you should have locked the door!"
"Why, aunt, I never lock the doors when I go after water. I suppose
you'll put the blame of it on me!" Here Lucindy began to cry. "I think
you are a very strange woman to leave no one but a girl alone in a
house, with such valuable things; it's a wonder the robbers didn't
kill me; my coming in frightened them away. I've no doubt they thought
it was the hired man," Lucindy continued to cry.
Mrs. Gimson never suspected her niece of such systematic deception.
The well was a short distance from the house, and that accounted for
the fact that nothing else was missing, as they had not had time, and
also that the other dresses had been rudely dragged to get them down.
She believed Lucindy's story. Mrs. Randolph could not account for the
plight in which she found her clothing, and bewailed her loss, as
being particularly annoying at this juncture.
Nothing more was said, and, after taking tea, they started for the
Judge's, leaving Mrs. Gimson in a greatly perturbed state of mind. She
knew that this unfortunate thing would get abroad and discourage
patrons. Desirable boarders would avoid her house in future.
Lucindy, never uttering a comforting word to her aunt, went up to her
room with an air of injured innocence that hurt her aunt quite as much
as any thing she had undergone. During the early part of the evening a
violent thunder storm came up, and Mrs. Randolph did not return. The
next morning it still rained, and there was no excuse for Lucindy's
going out, and the dress could not be secured. Mrs. Randolph returned
at noon, and informed Mrs. Gimson that she had been invited to visit,
for the rest of the summer, at Judge Brander's, and would leave Mrs.
Gimson's the next day.
Just as soon as Lucindy could be spared, she ran down to the tree
post-office, put a note into the tin box, and returned. This, Carrie
Hess got as soon as recess came, and the scheme worked out
successfully, as the event proved.
Barry, Hattie's brother, was standing by the shrubbery gate, when a
little barefoot boy sidled up, and attracted his attention by his
curious behavior--he finally spoke:
"I say, them Hitalyans stuffed yer mother's clothes inter a tree down
here; I found it this mornin'."
"What do you mean?" asked Barry, not fully understanding the boy.
"That ere tree, don't yer see?" and the boy pointed to the girls'
post-office, that stood out dimly down the road.
"Is it there now?" asked Barry.
"I do'no, I seed it there this mornin'."
"Wait till I go and tell my mother," said Barry, and he ran into the
house.
In a moment Mrs. Randolph and Mrs. Gimson were at the gate, but the
boy had disappeared. "Go down, Barry, and see if what he says is
true," said his mother. He ran off, and returning after a little time,
brought the overskirt, rolled up in a soiled bundle, as the rain had
soaked it and the decayed wood had stained it.
"Yes, I think it must have been those tramps," said Mrs. Randolph.
"They hid it there, expecting to come for the rest of it the next day.
They'll be disappointed. I'll be gone."
The boy was Carrie Hess's brother, and the ruse had worked; entirely
turning off all suspicion from Lucindy.
Mrs. Gimson lost her summer boarders and Lucindy returned to school.
This unprincipled girl, however, learned the hard lesson, in her after
life, that ingratitude to benefactors, and unfaithfulness to trust,
meet a sure retribution, even if they appear to succeed.
The night came darkly down;
The birdies' mother said,
"Peep! peep!
You ought to be asleep!
'Tis time my little ones were safe in bed!"
So, sheltered by her wings in downy nest,
The weary little birdlings took their rest.
The night came darkly down;
The baby's mother said,
"Bye-low!
You musn't frolic so!
You should have been asleep an hour ago!"
And, nestling closer to its mother's breast,
The merry prattler sank to quiet rest.
Then in the cradle soft
'Twas laid with tenderest care.
"Good-night!
Sleep till the morning light!"
Whispered the mother as she breathed a prayer.
Night settled down; the gates of day were barred
And only loving angels were on guard.
It stands in the corner of Grandma's room;
From the ceiling it reaches the floor;
"Tick-tock," it keeps saying the whole day long,
"Tick-tock," and nothing more.
Grandma says the clock is old, like herself;
But dear Grandma is wrinkled and gray,
While the face of the clock is smooth as my hand,
And painted with flowers so gay!
Backwards and forwards, this way and that,
You can see the big pendulum rock:
"Tick-tock," it keeps saying the whole day long,
"Tick-tock, tick-tock, tick-tock!"
The clock never sleeps, and its hands never rest
As they slowly go moving around;
And it strikes the hours with a ding, ding, ding,
Ding, ding, and a whirring sound.
I wonder if this is the same old clock
That the mousie ran up in the night,
And played hide-and-seek till the clock struck one,
And then ran down in a fright.
Backwards and forwards, this way and that,
You can see the big pendulum rock;
"Tick-tock," it keeps saying the whole day long,
"Tick-tock, tick-tock, tick-tock!"
Yesterday, Alice met the stuffed Jumbo, her former mate. She walked
slowly up to him, and then stood for a few moments, evidently
surveying him with wonder. Then she swung her trunk so as to reach
Jumbo's mouth. She also touched his trunk in a cautious manner, and
then turning her back upon him, gave vent to a groan that made the
roof of the garden tremble. William Newman, the elephant trainer,
Frank Hyatt, the superintendent, and "Toddy" Hamilton, talked to her
in their usual winning way, and she again faced Jumbo. She fondled his
trunk, looked straight into his eyes, and again she groaned, and then
walked away as though disgusted with the old partner of her joys and
sorrows. She went back to her quarters and continued to mourn. Her
keeper, Scott, was appealed to by the spectators. He was asked whether
he believed that she recognized Jumbo, and he replied in all
seriousness, "Of course she did. She told me so." At another time he
said, "I can understand elephant talk, and Alice told me she
recognized Jumbo." Scott seemed very much affected by the meeting. He
was Jumbo's old keeper.--_Humane Journal._
O softly falling flakes of snow
That fill the wintry air,--
A thickening cloud on every side,
Each flake a wonder rare.
"Are they from trees in Silver Land?"
My child is asking me.
He claps his hands, he laughs, he begs,
"One leaf from silver tree."
Such questions as he asks in vain
About the leaf-like snow!
He might as well talk of the tides
That strangely come and go.
"Who plants those fairy trees?" he asks,
"With tops that reach so high?"
Oh, answer, Garden of Delight,
All in the cloudy sky!
"Who shakes those trees and sends their leaves
On field and wood and town?
Is it the Gardener living there,
Or winds that blow them down?"
O child, look up and see yourself,
The clouds are Silver Land.
Who made those flakes, He scatters them;
They fall at His command.
They fall, they melt, they come again.
And His the gardener's hand
That gently shakes the silver trees
Which grow in Silver Land.
Did you ever think of how lowly was the start in life of many of our
great men? Read the pages of history and you will find that fully
seven out of ten of the great men were really poor. Bonaparte used to
be a book agent, Gould was a surveyor, Franklin was a printer,
Garfield worked on the tow path, Lincoln was a rail splitter, Grant
was a tanner, Poe was always in financial distress; Crome, the great
artist, used to pull hair from his cat's tail to make his brushes;
Astor came to New York with nothing as the foundation of his fortunes.
The list is almost endless.
To us, there is much encouragement in these facts. By looking into the
lives of such men we find the secret of success. Lincoln was a poor
Illinois farmer, with no visionary dreams of his great future. He was
poor and unlearned. Of the poverty he was not ashamed; of his lack of
learning he was by no means satisfied. He resolved to gain knowledge.
He studied, studied hard, and at a time in his life when other men
felt they had passed the age of schooling. Of his work, we find he
always tried to give an honest day's labor; his motto was to do well
everything he put his hands to. It was this trait of character that
attracted the attention of his neighbors, and this it was that first
started him on the road to great success.
Look at the early days of Grant. There was no indication of unusual
brightness in him. At West Point, where he was sent to military
school, he did not stand at the head of his classes. He only seemed an
earnest worker, with plenty of determination. Later, when he lived on
his little Illinois farm, there was nothing about him that pointed him
out as the future great general. It was only when the great civil war
broke out that he had an opportunity to show the kind of a man he was.
His only thought was to accomplish the task assigned him, be it ever
so difficult. This naturally found him in the line of promotion, and
step by step he climbed higher, earning by hard work every step he
gained, until he reached the highest office in the land.
Take Edison, the inventor. He was only a tramp telegrapher, but he was
not satisfied with being anything but the best, and many are the
stories of speed he attained in sending or receiving messages. He was
inquisitive--wanted to know more of the mysteries of the electricity
that carried his messages. He began experimenting, and by close
application to his studies, has astonished the world with his
telephone, phonograph and other inventions.
Now, these great men are not merely the products of chance. Not at
all. Study each of them and you will find they were workers, gaining
by just such struggles as you and I can make. We may not reach such
distinction as these have reached, but rest assured there is just as
great a demand now as ever for good, earnest men, and earnest,
successful men grow from painstaking boys. The boy who, as clerk in
the counting-house, watches after the interests of his employers, will
be the coming merchant; the young man on the farm who slights not the
work assigned him, will own a farm of his own.
Let this lesson make an impression. The road to success may be rugged,
but it is not so steep but that enough steps, if in the right
direction, be they ever so short, will in time carry you a long way
toward the top.
This, one of the grandest of American natural sceneries, is located
along the Colorado River. The river, in its years and years of
flowing, has washed out the soil, and owing to the peculiar
composition of the ground has washed it away unevenly, and these
standing peaks are so numerous and so fantastic in form, that this
location has been called the Garden of the Gods. It is most impressive
and inspiring grandeur. A trip will well repay a journey from the most
remote parts of our country to see this view, only a little of which
is in the engraving.
Albert, the blacksmith's son, will be an artist some day. While other
boys are playing ball or skating, or other amusements, Albert is using
his time making pictures. He seems to delight in it, and even when
quite a small boy, many were the scoldings he received from his
parents for a too free use of his chalk and pencil, leaving his rude
drawings on wall and fences; and in school his troubles were only
increased, for his books always contained pictures, sometimes of
horses, or dogs, or of his friends. This habit did not correspond with
his teachers' ideas of tidiness, and punishment followed punishment.
It did not help matters, though, and his drawing continued. In time he
became quite apt and could make pictures that very closely resembled
the objects he drew. His companions called him the "artist," and they
would have him make pictures of them. Some of his methods were odd
enough. To make an outline of a boy's face he would tack a piece of
paper on the side of a door in his father's shop, and by placing the
boy between the paper and a lighted lamp, would trace with pencil the
outline of the shadow as it fell on the paper. Soon he tried painting
with paint and brush. At first his efforts were crude, and to anyone
less determined and enthusiastic, discouraging. Not so to Albert. He
worked along day after day, and in time could paint well enough to
attract some notice in his little village.
About this time a great artist from the city, spending the summer in
this part of the country, heard of Albert, and by accident met him.
Quick to perceive the natural talent of the boy, and being generously
inclined, he offered to take him to his city home and give him
training in his studio. The parents, though loth to be separated from
their son, saw here an opportunity to educate him in his favorite
study, and so accepted the offer.
You can well imagine Albert's surprise and delight when he first
entered the studio and saw the work of the master. How the great
paintings filled him with wonder. He proved an apt student, a true
artist, and year after year worked with patience and determination,
and became a noted painter.
He often thinks of his early days--of the pictures he made in the old
blacksmith shop. He thinks, too, of the years spent since then in
attaining prominence in his calling, but no regrets come to him.
The true story of how one boy succeeded can be of use to others. It
only takes this same perseverance and pluck to succeed in any other
calling. Had he complained because he could not paint like the master,
and not been contented to study on during these years, he could not
now lay claim to his present success and eminence as an artist. Let
others, in reading this, see in it an object, and may it bring to them
new resolve to succeed in the life work they have started on.
Life is what we make it, and not a matter of chance. By marking out a
future success we expect to accomplish,--by sticking closely to this
one idea, and bending every energy to attain it, we can come
approximately near accomplishing our undertaking.
Ralph and Lily had one game of which they never tired, and that was
"horses." It was really a convenient game, for it could be played on
wet or fine days, in the nursery or on the road. Perhaps it was best
fun on the road, "like real horses;" but I am not sure, for it was
very delightful to sit on the nursery table, with the box of bricks
for a coachman's seat, and from that elevated position to drive the
spirited four horses represented by the four chairs, to which the
reins would be fastened.
One day--a fine day--the two children were playing at their usual game
on the turnpike road, and waiting for nurse, who had gone into a
cottage near by to speak to the washerwoman. Nurse was a long time,
and Ralph, who was horse, was quite out of breath with his long trot
on the hard road. Lily touched him up with the whip, but all to no
avail--he could run no more.
"I've no breath left," said the poor horse, sinking down exhausted on
a heap of stones.
Lily put down the whip and patted his head to encourage him. "Soh!
soh!" she said, in as good an imitation as she could manage of the way
the groom spoke to their father's horse; "you are quite done, I see.
You must rest, and have a handful of oats," and she dived into her
pocket and produced a bit of biscuit, which the horse ate with great
satisfaction, and soon professed himself ready to go on again. "Ah!"
said Lily, sagely, "I knew you'd be all right soon; there's nothing
like food and kindness for horses when they're tired."
A tinker, with a cart and a poor, ill-fed beast harnessed to it,
happened to be passing, and heard the little girl's words. He stared
after her, for she seemed very small to speak so wisely, and the
tinker did not, of course, know that she was only repeating what she
had heard her father say.
"Well, I'm dazed!" exclaimed the tinker, looking after the children;
"wherever did little Missy learn that?"
He said no more then; but Lily's words stuck to him, and his poor
horse had reason to bless Lily for them, for from that day forward he
got, not only more food, but more kindness and fewer blows and so he
became a better horse, and the tinker the better man in consequence.
Oh, it is fun! Oh, it is fun!
To dress ourselves up, as Grandma has done.
See how we go! See how we go!
Forward and back, heel and toe.
Lighter than down, our feet come down
Mind all your steps, and hold out your gown;
Faster than that, whatever may hap,
Cherry red waist and blue speckled cap.
Hi! Master John! Ho! Master John!
Don't go to sleep, while the music goes on;
Faster than that! Faster than that!
Hold up your head, and flourish your hat!
How she trips it along, that bright little maid,
With her dainty blue skirt and spotted brocade;
And that one in yellow, who wears the red rose
How she keeps her mouth shut and turns out her toes.
How they do spin! when they truly begin;
Each dancer as airy and bright as a doll;
While the music complete, keeps time to their feet,
With its fiddle-dee-diddle and tol-de-rol-ol!
Oh, it is fun! Oh, it is fun!
To dance, when every duty is done;
Forward and back, or all in a ring,
A quick little dance is a very gay thing.
Joey was a country boy,
Father's help and mother's joy;
In the morning he rose early,--
That's what made his hair so curly;
Early went to bed at night,--
That's what made his eyes so bright;
Ruddy as a red-cheeked apple;
Playful as his pony, Dapple;
Even the nature of the rose
Wasn't quite as sweet as Joe's.
Charley was a city boy,
Father's pet and mother's joy;
Always lay in bed till late;
That's what made his hair so straight,
Late he sat up every night,--
That's what made his cheeks so white;
Always had whate'er he wanted,
He but asked, and mother granted;
Cakes and comfits made him snarly,
Sweets but soured this poor Charley.
Charley, dressed quite like a beau,
Went, one day, to visit Joe.
"Come," said Joey, "let's go walking;
As we wander, we'll be talking;
And, besides, there's something growing
In the garden, worth your knowing."
"Ha!" said Charley, "I'm your guest;
Therefore I must have the best.
All the _inner_ part I choose,
And the _outer_ you can use."
Joey gave a little laugh;
"Let's," said he, "go half and half."
"No, you don't!" was Charley's answer,
"I look out for number one, sir."
But when they arrived, behold,
On the tree a peach of gold,
All without, fair, ripe and yellow,
Fragrant, juicy, tempting, mellow,
And, within, a gnarly stone.
"There," said Joey, "that's your own;
As you choose, by right of guest,
Keep your choice--I'll eat the rest."
Charley looked as black as thunder,
Scarce could keep his temper under.
"'Twas too bad, I think," said Joe;
"Through the cornfield let us go,
Something there, perhaps we'll see
That will suit you to a T."
"Yes," said Charles, with accent nipping,
"Twice you will not catch me tripping;
Since I lost the fruit before,
You now owe me ten times more.
Now the _outer_ part I choose,
And the _inner_ you can use."
Joey gave another laugh;
"Better call it half and half."
"No, indeed!" was Charley's answer,
"I look out for number one, sir!
Well I know what I'm about,--
For you, what's in; for me what's out!"
On they went, and on a slope
Lay a luscious cantaloupe,
Rich and rare, with all the rays
From the August suns that blaze;
Quite _within_ its sweets you find,
And _without_ the rugged rind.
Charley gazed in blank despair,
Deeply vexed and shamed his air.
"Well," said Joey, "since you would
Choose the bad and leave the good;
Since you claimed the outer part,
And disdained the juicy heart,--
Yours the rind, and mine the rest;
But as you're my friend and guest,
Charley, man, cheer up and laugh,
And we'll share it half and half;
Looking out for number one
Doesn't always bring the fun."
Woodcroft to be sold!--like a knell of doom the words fell on our
ears--it could not be! Our dear old home, the only one we children had
ever known, to be taken from us. We sat in the bright little
sitting-room, blankly looking at one another, in dumb astonishment.
Louise, who was always the thoughtful one, soon roused herself from
the stupor which seemed to have come upon us all, and going over to
the lounge, began comforting--as best she could, poor child--our
gentle little mother, upon whom this blow had fallen most heavily.
Presently she sat up, and in trembling tones told us, as we clustered
at her knee, the particulars of our misfortune.
There were three of us--Louise, Cal and I, who rejoiced in the quaint
cognomen of Pen, named for a rich, eccentric, old aunt, who had never
left me any money because she never died.
"Now, Marmo, out with all the trouble and let us share it," said
matter-of-fact Cal. And then she told how, after papa's sudden death a
year before, she had discovered a mortgage to be on the place, small,
but now due and no money to meet it; the creditor was pressing, and
the home to be sold. We felt sad, but cheered her up, and talked over
ways and means as never before.
"Even though he consents to renew it, where would the yearly interest
money come from," she wailed.
We urged her to lie down and rest, and, following Cal's beckoning
finger, tip-toed out of the room.
"Now, girls," said she, "_something's_ got to be done, and _we've_ got
to do it."
One thing after another was proposed and rejected; we knew, if the
home were sold, after the demands were met, there would be but a mere
pittance left for four females to live on. Finally I broke in:
"Girls, my brain is not usually fertile, but a thought has been
growing--we are all well educated, but teaching is out of the
question, the supply is greater than the demand, but Lou, here, is
skilled with pencil and brush, and Cal has a genius for contrivance;
now why could you not paint and decorate some of the dainty trifles
you often make as gifts, and _sell_ them. _I_ always did have a notion
for cookery, which I shall proceed to put in practice, dismissing the
servants." Having delivered this little speech, I paused, breathless.
Cal clapped her hands, and Lou's brown eyes glowed. "Pen, you little
duck," and Cal pounced on me in an excess of joy.
"But," faltered Lou, "the mortgage."
"I thought of that too--our lady-like Louise shall go to that crusty
old creditor, and beg him to _renew_ it, and with what you girls earn
and what we save from the rent of the farm land (for we must live
economically) we will pay him the interest promptly." I will add, that
she did that very thing, and completely won over the hard-hearted
fellow with her sweet, earnest manner.
So to work we went, and the sitting-room was converted into a studio,
littered with papers, books, gay ribbons and glue-pots. But some
exquisite creations came out of that chaos. I had visited the
aforesaid Aunt Pen the previous winter, in New York city, and at the
American Specialty House had been enchanted with the many novel and
beautiful pieces of decorated work. All would be entirely new in
_this_ part of the world, and our idea was, to take orders from the
near towns for their Holiday trade. It was now only May and we would
have plenty of time. Cal, who, with her brusque, honest ways,
determined face, and curly, short hair, was our man of business, took
samples of our work in to the various towns, receiving large orders in
almost every instance.
Happy and busy as bees we worked, and began to feel quite important,
as the pile grew high, of white boxes, filled with delicate satin
souvenirs for wedding and birthdays, Christmas tokens of lovely
design, little poems with dainty painted covers, blotters and thought
books, beautifully decorated, all of which found ready sale. The
little mother's sad eyes began to brighten, and Cal would say:
"Marmo, we can take care of you almost as good as sons, can't we?"
"God bless my daughters," would be the reply.
Louise had established her studio under the old apple-tree one warm
June day, and, running out to call her to lunch, I found she had gone
down in the garden, but I saw the cutest, prettiest sight! I beckoned
her to come softly. There, on her sketch-book, opened against the
tree, and on which was a half-finished painting of birds, hopped
around two brown sparrows, peeping and twittering as contentedly as
possible. It was too cunning! as though they had recognized their
portraits and felt at home.
"A tribute to your genius, Lou," said I. "Like the famous artist of
old, who painted cherries so naturally, the birds flew down and pecked
at the canvas."
"I fear I shall have to dispel the illusion, dear. I guess they were
more eager to pick up some cake crumbs I left than to admire my work."
Readers, you will be glad to know that the girls' work continued
successful, and that the "crusty old creditor" turned out a good
friend, from sheer admiration of their pluck and courage.
Merryvale was not a very lively place for any one except a couple of
young colts, and as many calves, jumping around after their mothers.
The bees seemed to be making a good deal of fun for themselves, if
stinging us children amused them, and buzzing into every pretty,
bright flower, so that no one could pick it with safety.
The crows, too, collected in great gossiping parties, in the pines,
over on the shore of the pond, and they always seemed to be
congratulating themselves over something immensely satisfactory.
But we children, especially the girls, found it very dull after we had
seen the few sights of the farm. The boys were trying to hunt and
fish; but Lib and I talked that over, and we came to the conclusion,
after much laughing and many caustic remarks, that the only amusement
we had was, laughing at their failures.
We communicated that fact to them, but it didn't seem to make any
difference; off they went on the same fruitless hunt, and left us to
do what we might, to make ourselves happy.
The next day, Lib and Dora and I told them we would go into the woods
with them and see what the charm was. Lib was the eldest of us three,
and had read a great deal, and she said:
"May be we shall find the robbers' cave, and if we say, 'Open Sesame,'
the great stone doors will slowly swing open, and we can go in where
the chains of flashing gems and the heaps of golden coin are."
"I think you'll get into places where you can't get out; 'open sesame'
will never lift you out of a marsh hole," said William Pitt Gaylord,
our eldest brother.
"Mollie, you can find somebody to have a talking match with, for there
are lots of chipmunks over in the grove," remarked Hugh.
"I've seen snakes in that very woods, too, and if you'd holler, Lib,
at that end of the pond, as you do at this end of the tea-table, you
wouldn't catch any fish," said William. This caused an uproarious
laugh on the part of the boys.
We listened quietly to their sarcastic remarks, knowing they were
prompted by an unreasonable desire to monopolize the delights of the
woods to themselves.
William Pitt remarked that "Girls had no business to meddle with boys'
sports, and they'd come to grief if they did; you'd see!"
Next morning the August haze lay soft on the landscape, but in a
short time it went off, and Father, learning that we girls were going
to spend a part of the day in the woods, quietly told the boys that
they must escort us to the pleasantest place, and not wander very far
off. They pouted considerably, and had a talk at the corner of the
barn; they then came back, smiling, and apparently good-natured.
Our brothers did not intend to be unkind, but they had the common
failing of humanity--selfishness. But Lib matched them in a dozen ways
with her good-humored retaliations; and many a tilt she had with
William Pitt since we had arrived at the farm. In the city she was
abreast of him in all his studies; and I noticed that Lib could get
out her Latin, and write a composition much faster than he, and often
he had been obliged to come to her for aid. It nettled Lib not to be
able to hunt and fish. We two younger ones modeled after her; she was
the leader, and when she said we would go with the boys, we went.
"Hello Fred," said Hugh, as a neighboring boy, a city boarder, came
through the gate, attired in base-ball cap and knickerbockers, "we
can't go to Duck Inlet to-day. Father says the girls must have a good
time, too, and that we must devote one day to them, at least."
"All right," said Fred, "can I go with you? I'll go and get my
butterfly net, and we can go over to Fern Hollow mill, the
winter-greens and berries are as thick there! Gracious! you can get a
quart pail full in no time. The mill-wheel is a beautiful sight," said
Fred, turning to Lib, "and you can sketch it, Miss Gaylord."
Lib looked upon Fred with a little more toleration, after he had said
"Miss Gaylord," and went and ordered an additional ration to be put
into the lunch basket. We were glad to have Fred along with us, for he
was very funny, and made jokes on every thing.
Lib would allow no one to carry the lunch basket but herself, as she
remarked, "It is safer with me."
We started, and were tempted to loiter at all the little nooks on the
leaf-shadowed road, and investigate the haunts of the curious dwellers
in the rocks and bushes, and especially were we interested in the
ducks on Fern Hollow creek. Dora insisted upon feeding them a piece of
bread. "Calamity," the dog, was along, of course, and as he belonged
to William Pitt, who called him "Clam," he was always in that boy's
company. It was, "Love me, love my dog," with William; and as he was a
professional of some kind, he was greatly prized by the boys.
We reached the woods and the old mill early; I think I never was in a
more delightful place. Every thing seemed to grow here.
Winter-greens, with their crimson berries, shining in the moss, and
blueberries, where the sun came; tall, white flowers that grew in
clusters in the shade, sent their perfume all about. Back of the mill,
on some sandy ledges, grew pennyroyal and spearmint; raspberries and
blackberries grew everywhere.
The boys went off to gather a quantity for lunch, and Lib and Dora and
I hunted for a pleasant place to set out our dainties. We found it. A
natural bower, between four trees; one being a giant of a pine, right
at the doorway. The wild grape-vine and the woodbine had inclosed the
space so completely, that Lib, who had thoughtfully brought along a
scissors to cut off stubborn plants, could make two windows in the
green wall; one looking into the woods, the other off at the distant
pond. The grass was fine in here, and the sunbeams dropped down in
little round spots, on the pine needles that covered the floor.
"This is certainly the fairies' dining hall," said Lib.
"I'll tell you what," said I, "this is not far from home, and we can
bring things, and have a little parlor here. I can make a couple of
curtains out of that figured scrim, for windows, and that old square
rug in the carriage-house will do for the floor. You can bring your
rocking-chair, Lib, and Dora can bring her tea-set."
"I'll bring our Christmas and Easter cards, and we can fasten them all
about, on the walls," said Lib, who had fallen in immediately with the
plan.
"I'll bring Mrs. Snobley, and all her children, and the dining table,"
said Dora.
She had reference to her large doll, and a whole dozen of little ones,
that were always brought forward in any play that Dora had taken a
fancy to.
We were in such haste to put our scheme into operation, that we
dispatched the lunch in short order, and told the boys of our plan.
They thought it was capital. Any thing that would release them, after
they had eaten all that was to be had, would, of course, be received
with acclamation. They acknowledged the same, in a very neat speech,
which Lib said, "did very good for Hugh."
She fell in immediately with our fun, and helped us to a number of
nice things, to furnish our greenwood bower. We worked tremendously
that afternoon, and after Betty had washed the dinner dishes, she
helped us. Before sun-down every thing was complete. The boys, who had
taken themselves a mile away, to hunt, came round to visit us on their
way home. They agreed that it was just perfect, and inquired if we
hadn't put in an elevator, to reach the second story, with numerous
other inquiries, intended to be funny; and then asked where we kept
our cranberry tarts.
"We're not going to allow any boys in this play-house after to-day,"
said I; "your feet are muddy, and you're so big, you fill it all up."
Our visitor, Fred, looked at his feet, and blushed. "Not after to-day?
How are you going to keep any one out?" inquired William Pitt.
"We will draw this portiere across the doorway, and no _gentleman_
would think of entering," said Lib.
"No, they wouldn't, sure enough," said Hugh. "How are you going to
prevent our looking in the windows?"
"Only rude boys would look in windows," said Fred, "and I don't know
of any hereabouts."
They laughed at this, and Lib laughed too, and made the sly remark,
that "Hunting on the duck-pond transformed some people mighty soon."
Fred said he'd try to be on his good behavior if we'd let him make a
formal call on us the next afternoon. We consented to this; then they
all said they'd call.
The next day we busied ourselves in preparing a spread of good things
for our reception, and Betty took it over, and on returning, said
every thing was just as we had left it. We dressed ourselves up in our
best, to receive the gentlemen, a little time after dinner. The woods
were never so lovely, we thought, and to add to our personal charms,
we made wreaths and garlands of ferns and wild-flowers to adorn our
persons and hats.
I had sauntered along considerably in advance, and as I approached the
bower I was not a little surprised to see from a distance that the
door-curtain was drawn half open. I stopped to listen, but there was
no sound, only a wild bird piping its three little notes, down by the
mill. I cautiously went up, and peeped into the little window, and
there stood a man on the rug! He seemed to be looking about. I think I
never was so frightened. I ran back, and whispered to the rest the
dreadful state of things. They looked horror-stricken. Lib changed
color, but just stood still. Then she said,--"There's plenty of help
over at the mill."
"Oh, let us go no nearer, but get home as fast as we can," I said.
Lib raised her hand in warning for us to keep still, and we crept
along, softly, behind the bower; and when we had gotten so far, we all
turned around and ran for dear life into the woods again.
"This is nonsense," said Lib. "You were mistaken, Mollie, I'm sure."
I said I'd go back with her, and she could see for herself. We crept
to the back of the bower, and Lib leaned over and looked in. Lib
turned pale, caught hold of my hand and Dora's, and ran quite a
distance toward the mill. Then she stopped, and said, as true as she
was alive, there was a man in there; he stood with a large stick
resting on his shoulder, upon which was slung a bundle, tied up in a
red handkerchief, his clothing was ragged, and his hat was very
dilapidated.
"Oh, Lib, I'm going to run for it," said I.
"Wait a minute," said she. "I don't hear any noise. Let's think; if we
didn't have to go right in front of the door, we could get to the
mill."
All this time we were edging ourselves as far away from the dangerous
precincts as we conveniently could. She stood again, perfectly still.
"I won't go another step," she said. That moment's reflect had
re-instated her courage. "He don't come out; I should say that was
making an informal call when the ladies were out. He's a
beautiful-looking specimen anyway," said Lib, with fine irony; and as
she said this, she frowned, and put her head back.
No sound was heard, and no demonstrations from the interloper were
made. The sight of the mill-wagon, going slowly down the road, gave us
heart, and Lib said:
"I'll go and order him out, be the consequences what they may.
Mollie, you're good at screaming, you can bring the miller here if we
have to get help."
"Don't! Don't! I would rather he stole all our things; let him have
the tarts and the cocoanut cake, and the jam, and the pickles, and the
cheese, and the sandwiches! Let him have them in welcome! I'm going to
fly home!"
"I want Mrs. Snobley!" sobbed Dora.
Lib never said another word. She walked up to the entrance, and pulled
aside the curtain, and there stood the semblance of a man. In his
extended hand was a card, on which was very badly printed:
"_I'm a poor b'y,--I want a home._"
"_References exchanged._"
"_I'll scrape the mud off me boots, if ye'll let me
in._"
Lib called, "Come here, Mollie, it's a trick of those boys."
We went in, and there we found the interloper to be a scarecrow from a
neighboring field, ingeniously arranged so as to appear very human.
At that moment, a loud laugh above our heads betrayed the presence of
the boys in the trees, who clambered down with hilarious expedition,
and fairly rolled themselves upon the ground with delight. They had
seen all our perturbation; had heard my cowardly cries and
expressions; Lib's looking in the window, and her fearful hesitation
and scamper behind the fairy bower! The best thing to do was to laugh,
and that we did right heartily; we girls, were internally thankful
that the intruder was only a scarecrow after all.
We ordered the boys take their silly joke out, and to come in like
gentlemen, and make a formal call, and probably they would be invited
to take some refreshments.
This news caused them to work with great alacrity. They were dressed
up too; Fred having chosen to wear his school uniform, with a gorgeous
crimson sash and his sword.
We were never so delighted with any thing as with that afternoon's
adventure. For hours we chatted and laughed, and ate our refreshments,
until the western light began to take on a ruddy hue, and we closed
our little bower and proceeded homeward.
What was our surprise, when we reached there, to find that three young
friends from the city with their servant had come to visit us.
Merryvale was not dull after that, I can assure you.
"Oh, Bessie! I've such an idea, _such_ a good one, and _so_ sure, you
can't think how it came either, if you guessed and tried for a week!"
"Child, you are always having ideas, but they amount to nothing; you
have enough to do at home, without continually fretting your head
about what you cannot carry out."
"But, Bessie, this is _just splendid_, and it came to me all of a
sudden, and I'm sure as sure can be that it is a real _good_ idea. Now
wont you listen!"
"I suppose I must, if I want any peace; but I'm very tired, so if it
is like your latest--to catch fish and sell them in the town, or to
have your curls cut off and let some city hair-dresser pay you for
them--there will be no use to tell it to me."
"Tain't neither, Bessie dear, it's a real clever idea, and I know you
wont say 'no' to it. I was looking over some of the old picture papers
this morning, and I found a funny picture of a gentleman that had gone
fishing with, oh! the greatest lot of lines, and a fine rod, and a
basket swung at his back, and he looked ever so nice; but he hadn't
caught any thing and he was ashamed to go back to the city with an
empty basket; and then there was another picture where he was buying a
great string of fish from a bare-footed little country boy, that had
caught them all, and had only a rough old pole and an old line on it."
"So it _is_ the fishing idea, again," said Bessie, "but the present
variation does not improve on the last."
"No, it just ain't the fishing idea any more; it's this: you know all
the excursion parties that come up here, are coming all the time now;
well, the ladies all gather autumn leaves, lots and lots, handsful and
handsful of them. But they get tired of carrying so many after a
while, and by the time they get ready to go back to the cars, their
leaves are thrown away, and they are empty-handed. Now just listen! If
I go to work and pick out the _very_ prettiest leaves and do them up
in the _very_ sweetest bunches, and tie them so they are easy to
carry, and meet them when they are starting to go home, I'm _sure_
they will buy them, just like the gentleman did the fish from that
boy. Now, ain't that a _real good_ idea?"
"I believe there is something in it, Katie," answered the eldest
sister.
"I knew you would," cried Katie, joyously, "and may I try it?"
"If you will be very careful and not talk too much to the people you
know nothing of, I have no objections; it can do no harm, at all
events," and poor, tired Bessie sighed as she looked at her bright
young sister and thought of the time when she too was young and full
of hope and gay spirits.
There was quite a family of these Wilsons in the little house at the
foot of the mountains, in Pennsylvania. The widowed mother, sickly and
almost blind; Bessie, a young lady, the eldest daughter, aged
twenty-three, who taught a very large school for very small pay; then
Katie not quite twelve, and Robbie, the baby, the pet, the boy, who
was only five.
Three years before, their father had been living, and they had enjoyed
all that wealth could bring them. Suddenly he sickened and died, and
then came the dreadful knowledge that he left nothing for his family;
he was deeply in debt to his partner, with whom he had worked a large
coal-mine, and this Mr. Moore was what all people called a "hard man,"
he was old and crabbed, and always wanted and would have every cent
coming to him. Bessie was to have been married to his son, Philip, but
when poverty came to her, the old man refused to let Philip see her
more, and the girl was too proud to go into a family where she was
not wanted, and, beside, she had her poor mother, who had given up
and failed fast after her misfortunes, she had her to look after. So
Bessie taught school; Katie attended to the little home into which
they had moved from the great house on the hill, a noble little
housekeeper she was; Robbie did about as he pleased and was well
content with life, except when neat Katie would seize him and wash his
face with plenty of soap in his eyes, and comb his tangled curls with
a comb that "allus pulled," as he cried.
It was hard for them to pay the rent, to get food and the many
delicacies Mrs. Wilson had always been used to, and now needed more
than ever. Bessie's small wages from her school were taken, every
cent, for these, and Katie was continually bothering her young head
with "ideas" as to how _she_ could make money to help them all. The
autumn leaves were the latest, and it really did seem as though there
were something in it.
The next day was Saturday, Bessie was free from school duties, and so
her little sister had more time at her disposal. Friday evening she
and Robbie gathered a great quantity of bright-colored leaves; the
next morning, bright and early, they were out again; the little back
porch was filled with them.
With her own natural good taste, aided by Bessie's more cultivated
judgment, they made up many neat, beautiful bunches of those
bright-colored droppings from the forest trees. These she placed in a
large but pretty basket that once had been sent, filled with rare
fruit, to Bessie, from Philip, and the older girl sighed when she gave
it to her sister.
Then Katie started, leaving Robbie behind crying; and with a trembling
heart and a big lump in her throat, but bravely as a little soldier,
she made her way to the path by which the excursion parties would have
to return to the cars. Soon they began to come along, all tired,
trying to be merry ladies and gentlemen.
Katie stood with her basket on her arm. She did not know how pretty
she looked, with her brown curls floating out from beneath her big
sun-bonnet, her pure white apron, her dark dress which Bessie had made
from one of her own, with delicate bits of lace at the wrists, a
bright bit of ribbon about her throat and a plain little breast-pin
clasping it. Her big black eyes looked longingly at the passers-by,
her red lips tried, many times, to utter some words that would help
her sell her wares, but she could not speak, she could only up her
hand and _look_ her wants.
"What lovely leaves!" cried a young lady, "these of mine seem all
faded by the carrying, and I'm tired of the great load anyhow," and
she threw away a great lot tied round with her handkerchief, and
hastened toward the little merchant.
"What a pretty girl," said the young man with her.
"How much are these?" inquired the lady.
Bessie had not thought of what she would ask for her bunches, and now,
between pleasure and fright, she could not think of any price to put
upon them.
"Whatever you please, Miss," she faintly murmured.
"How lovely they are," said the lady, and taking three bunches, she
gave two to the young man with her, telling him: "Harry, you must
carry these, and pay the child," the third one she kept in her own
hand.
The gentleman put his hand in his pocket, drew it out, and dropped
into Katie's basket a silver dollar.
The tears almost blinded the little girl--tears of joy over her first
success--she could hardly see what the coin was, but when she picked
it up she managed to stammer that she "had no change."
"Don't want any, little one," said the young man pleasantly, "the
sight of you is worth all the money and more." Then the couple hurried
away.
But their stopping had attracted many more, and a dozen bought of
Katie, and, though few were as generous as her first customers, she
soon disposed of most of her stock at ten cents a bunch, having gained
courage to fix and state her price. Quite a number gave her more than
that sum, and she began to feel a very rich little girl, indeed.
More than half her stock was sold, when an old gentleman and a young
lady came along. The lady, as usual, was the first to admire the
bright bunches, she took two, the old gentleman giving Katie fifty
cents and telling her that "was right." He seemed a cross old man, but
still spoke pleasantly.
"What's your name, child?" he asked.
"Katie Wilson, sir," replied the little girl, faintly.
"Um! um! Come along Helen," said he, hastily, and hurried away.
These were the last of the excursion parties, except an elderly lady
having in charge a dozen children, all dressed alike; little ones from
a soldiers' orphan school, for whom some kind person had provided a
day's pleasure. They were tired and worn out with romping, and dragged
along slowly; they looked at Katie's bright face and longingly at the
pretty leaves in her basket. The girl's heart was touched; timidly she
held out a bunch to a little boy who half stopped in front of her, he
took it eagerly; in a moment the others were about her. By good
fortune, she had enough to give on to each and an extra bunch to the
lady.
With the thanks of these poor children in her heart, an empty basket
and a happy jingle in her pocket she ran nearly all the way home,
burst in on Bessie, put her arms about her neck and sobbed for
happiness.
When the elder sister at last succeeded in calming her, she told the
whole story of her afternoon's work.
Together they counted the money--three dollars and eighty-five
cents--just think of it!
If ever there was a happy, excited little girl, it was Katie that
night. She could not sleep or eat. When she _had to_ go to bed, she
lay awake long, long hours, thinking how _she_ would buy back the big
house, how mother should have doctors and every thing she needed, how
Bessie should stop teaching and have a horse and little carriage, and
pretty dresses, and a piano, like she used to, and how Robbie should
go to school and college and grow up to be a great man and finally be
President. She never thought of herself, except that _she_ was to do
all this, and when she fell asleep she dreamed the whole thing over
again, and that it had turned out just as she planned.
All through the excursion season Katie sold her leaves, and though she
never made as much as on the first day, yet when people stopped coming
she had over one hundred dollars in Bessie's hands, all made by
herself, all made by being up early and attending to her household
duties and working hard so as to have her bunches ready by the time
that visitors were returning to the train.
She was brave, and true, and unselfish, and her reward was great.
It was one chill November evening, toward Thanksgiving day, that she
and Robbie had wandered out among the mountain paths; the little
fellow was wild as a colt and ran here and there until it was all
Katie could do to keep track of him. Finally she caught him; both were
tired out, and when she looked around, to her great terror, she could
not make out just where they were. They wandered along and at last
came to a road, but she did not know which way to go. Robbie was cross
and sleepy; she could not carry the heavy boy, and he _would_ lay
down; at last she let him rest. He dropped by a fallen log and in a
moment was asleep. She covered him with a little cloth cape she wore,
and sat down beside him; her eyes were heavy, she nodded, and very
soon was as sound as he.
Along the road came a thin, old, but active man; he stepped out firmly
and aided his steps with a stout cane. It was after dusk of the
evening. He spied something in the gloom, on the other side of the
road, something unusual; he crossed over; it was a little girl leaning
against a big, fallen tree and a small boy stretched on the ground
beside it; both were fast asleep. He touched the girl's shoulder; she
sprang up. "Oh!" she gasped, "don't hurt Robbie! We weren't doing any
harm, indeed we weren't."
"What are you doing here any how?" he inquired.
"It was Robbie, no, it was me, he was so sleepy and so was I, and we
were just resting until we could start and try to find home again."
"Um! so you're lost, are you?"
"No, sir, I guess not only--only we don't know the way."
"Well, I should say that's pretty near being lost. Where do you live?
What's your name?"
"We live in the old Mill cottage, and my name's Katie Wilson, and
Robbie's is Robert T. Wilson."
"Um! um! Yes; well, I know where you live; come along, I'll put you
right. Come! wake up here, young man!" and he gently poked Robbie with
his cane. But Robbie was sleepy and cross, and cried and kicked, and
it was all Katie could do to get him on his feet and moving. Then as
they went slowly on, she holding her brother's hand, her own in that
of the stranger, he asked her: "Weren't you frightened to be out all
alone?"
"Why, no, sir," she answered. "I was frightened for mother and Bessie
being worried, but not for us; I just said my prayers and covered
Robbie, and then I fell asleep and didn't know any thing until you
woke me up."
"Um! said your prayers, did you!" and the old man stopped and looked
at her.
"See here, Katie!" he said, in a very gentle voice, "say your prayers
for me, I'd like to hear them."
The child looked at him in astonishment and trouble. Could it be that
the gentleman could not say his prayers for himself, that he did not
pray himself! "Oh, sir!" she said, with choking voice and tears in her
eyes, "I can't say them to you, only to Bessie or mother: It's just
God bless mother, and Bessie and Robbie and me, and take care of us in
the night and day, and--and that's all, sir."
"Well, never mind now, little Katie, come along, we must get Robbie
home to the mother and Bessie soon, or they'll think the bears have
eaten you both," and the old man's voice was still more gentle, and he
hurried as fast as the little ones could go. He knew the roads well,
and in half an hour they were on a path that the children were well
acquainted with, and near home.
There was a cry of joy, and Bessie sprang upon the little ones at a
bend in the road and gathered them in her arms, and kissed and scolded
and petted them, all at the same time.
The old gentleman hurried away as soon as he saw they were safe; but
he did not go far; he stepped back in the dark and heard Katie tell
the tale of adventure and take all the blame herself, and excuse
Robbie, and talk about the kind gentleman who had found them and
brought them home, and wonder where he had gone so quickly before she
had time to thank him. He followed them at a distance; he saw them
enter their home, and he watched outside until the lamp was lighted in
the little sitting-room; then he came near the window and looked in;
he watched while the sick, half-blind mother cried over her children;
he saw pale, sweet-faced Bessie comforting all; he stood there an
hour without noticing the cold and wind that grew about him. He saw
brave, hard-working Bessie, and true Katie, and the little boy, and
the mother of all, kneel at their chairs, and he thought he could hear
the prayers of thanks that came from the hearts of all and the lips of
the older sister, and he felt drops upon his cheek, not rain, but
tears--tears. It had been many years since his eyes had been wet with
tears, but they were there and they softened the heart of "hard old
man" Moore, and he turned away at last with a strange resolution in
his mind.
Three days after he was in the sitting-room of that cottage; with him
was his son Philip, by Philip's side was Bessie, looking ever so much
younger and prettier, and _so_, _so_ happy, and standing by the side
of "hard old man" Moore was little Katie, wondering to see such an old
man wipe the tears from his eyes, wondering at the way in which he
held one arm close around her, and wondering still more why he should
keep saying, all the time, "You did it, little Katie, you did it all."
The Wilsons are comfortable and happy now. Bessie is Mrs. Philip
Moore; the mother has doctors and luxuries; Robbie is at school and
learning fast; Katie, _our_ Katie, is learning fast also, but she is
still the same Katie as of old; she did not have to sell bunches of
leaves another season; but there are always great bouquets of the
beauties in the house, and old Mr. Moore, "hard" no longer, calls her
nothing but his little "Autumn leaf."
You will not mind, if I sit me down
And watch you spin, in your velvet gown?
You need not fear,
You can trust me here.
I think I can learn to spin, if I
Could watch you work. Will you let me try?
You spin and weave, but I cannot see
Just how 'tis done, and it puzzles me.
For you have no loom
In your little room.
No silken skein, no spinning-wheel,
No bobbin and no winding reel.
Please tell me what you use instead?
And where do you hide your shining thread,
As soft as silk
And as white as milk?
I think, Mrs. Spider, it must be
A secret, or you would answer me.
Strolling down back of the barn, and seeing a fluttering of wings near
the ground, Fred and John discovered, upon coming closer, that a poor
little bird had fallen from its nest in the bough of a tree that stood
near them. The bird was young, too young to fly, and seemed more dead
than alive from the fall. The boys took the bird, fondly caressed it,
stroked its feathers, and were glad to see that it showed signs of
life and that it was only stunned by the fall it had received. The
boys were kind-hearted, they were boys full of life, the first-most in
a race, in climbing a hill they among the first who stood on its top.
Yet in all their sports they were never cruel. So with the bird, they
only thought of how to care for it. The tree was too tall to climb
with safety, and then they were forbidden to climb this tree because
John had once ventured to the first of its branches and by some
accident, such as will happen to boys, he lost his hold and tumbled to
the ground and he still remembered the days of pain it caused.
Said Fred, "Why can we not take the bird home and care for it?"
So, with this suggestion, they brought it to the house and placed it
in a small basket. The basket was one they used to carry their dinners
to school in, and, of course, this could not be used to keep it in all
the time. John said, "It will be best to make a cage for it. We can,
with our knives, soon whittle out sticks for bars and with the saw and
some boards make a cage." They labored on this for two days, and then,
with Uncle Ben's help, for he could drive nails better than they, the
cage was completed. Some cotton was shaped into a nest and the bird
was placed in it and the cage was its home.
They fed it on berries and crumbs and it grew rapidly. It soon learned
to perch on one of the boy's fingers and pick its food from his hand.
When it had eaten enough it would fly to his shoulder and seem quite
contented. In due time it became full grown, and though it seemed to
know and appreciate the attention given it by the boys, yet it seemed
to long for more freedom than the little cage afforded. The boys
noticed this, and with sad hearts concluded it would be cruel to keep
it confined and so gave it its freedom. For some time it lingered
around the house, in branches of the trees, but finally it flew away
to the woods.
Many a long hard-working day
Life brings us! And many an hour of play;
But they never come now together,
Playing at work, and working in play,
As they came to us children among the hay,
In the breath of the warm June weather.
Oft, with our little rakes at play,
Making believe at making hay.
With grave and steadfast endeavor;
Caught by an arm, and out of sight
Hurled and hidden, and buried light
In laughter and hay forever.
Now pass the hours of work and play
With a step more slow, and the summer's day
Grows short, and more cold the weather.
Calm is our work now, quiet our play,
We take them apart as best we may,
For they come no more together!
Many a home, now dark and cheerless, might be made bright and cheery
by a few plants in the window, or bunches of ferns and bright autumn
leaves, fastened on the wall, or on the pictures.
Homes cannot be made too bright and home-like for the husband and the
children; and these little things cost little or nothing, and add much
to the general appearance.
A novel and pretty window ornament can be made in this way: Take a
white sponge of large size, and sow it full of rice, oats and wheat.
Then place it, for a week or ten days, in a shallow dish, in which a
little water is constantly kept, and as the sponge will absorb the
moisture, the seeds will begin to sprout before many days. When this
has fairly taken place, the sponge may be suspended by means of cords
from a hook in the top of the window where a little sun will enter. It
will thus become a mass of green, and can be kept wet by merely
immersing it in a bowl of water.
"Oh, it is too bad; too bad! that mother should be so troubled for the
want of a little money," said Mabel.
"Cheer up! Cheer up!" rang out a voice close at hand, "pretty Poll;
cheer up!" and a bright green parrot with a yellow breast began to
beat against the bars of his cage as if he would like to get out.
"That is a good omen, Polly," said Mabel, as she rose and opened the
door of the cage, "but it is not Poll who ought to 'cheer up' but I,
you pretty bird." Poll hopped out and perched upon her finger and
looked so knowingly at her, that it almost broke down the resolution
she had formed. Mabel was accustomed to take Poll out and talk to her,
and brother Ben, who was an amateur photographer, had taken a picture
of the pretty pair, so Polly was already immortalized.
"Poor Ben! Poor Ben!" said Polly. "'On Linden when the sun was
low'--ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! Poor Ben! Poor Ben!" laughed and shouted
Polly.
"Poor Ben, indeed!" said Mabel, "though the Ben you first heard about
was another Ben, and used to break down with his recitation and be
laughed at. I wonder where he is now, and whether he is dead, my brave
soldier uncle! If he were alive, and should come back, what would he
think to find another Polly just like the one he left behind, who had
learned some of the things his Polly used to say. Mamma says your
predecessor died of old age, Polly; I wonder if that will be your
destiny. I shall never know; for I am going to sell you to the lady up
at the hotel, who saw you hanging outside, and wanted you for her
little girl. She said she would give me five dollars, and when I
refused she offered me ten. I could not let you go, Polly, but now I
_must_. I must say 'good-bye' to you now, Polly, for I shall never
take you out of the cage again."
"Cheer up! cheer up!" sang Polly, as Mabel put her back, and closing
the cage, left the room.
The boys were leaving the sitting-room when she went down stairs, and
as Ben passed her, she said, "Do not go to bed till I come up again. I
want to speak to you. Wait in my room."
Mrs. Ross was getting ready to go up to her room when Mabel entered.
"Are you going up, mamma?" said she, "I will not keep you long; but I
want to tell you, that I think I know a way for you to get some money.
I wish to keep it a secret for the present; but I think I can safely
promise you some. The last thing before I came down, Polly called,
'cheer up, cheer up,' and it is a good omen; so I say the same to you,
mamma."
"You are a good girl, Mabel, but I am afraid you are too sanguine. How
can you hope to succeed where I have failed?"
"You will believe me when you see the money, shall you not, mamma?"
"There would not be much merit in that, dear, but I will _trust_ you,
and whatever happens I will believe you did what you thought was
right, and that God does every thing for the best."
"Thank you, mamma. Good night, and pleasant dreams."
"Good night, dear."
Mabel went softly up stairs. "Ben," said she, when she reached her
room, but Ben had fallen asleep, and she had to shake him up.
"What kept you?" said Ben, in a sleepy tone.
"Why, I was not long, Ben. Do you now the name of that little girl who
took such a fancy to Polly?"
"Yes," said Ben. "It is Eva Granby. What do you want to know for?"
"I shall tell you sometime, you are too sleepy to talk to-night, so I
shall let you go. Good night, Ben."
"Good night," said Ben, not sorry to be dismissed.
Mabel lay awake some time. She was sorry to part with her parrot, but
after all it was only a bird. Mamma and Ben and Walt and dear little
Joe should not suffer that she might keep it.
She could hear the music, from the great hotel on the hill, borne on