His wits, or sold them, none knows which;
He walks about a double ghost,
Ever grows more grim and rich.
There is a Chancery Court; a King;
A manufacturing mob; a set
Of thieves who by themselves are sent
An army; and a public debt.
Which last is a scheme of paper money,
And means--being interpreted--
'Bees, keep your wax--give us the honey,
Flowers, which in winter serve instead.'
There is a great talk of revolution--
And a great chance of despotism--
German soldiers--camps--confusion--
Gin--suicide--and methodism;
Taxes too, on wine and bread,
And meat, and beer, and tea, and cheese,
From which those patriots pure are fed,
The tenfold essence of all these.
There are mincing women, mewing,
(Like cats, who amant misere,)
Of their own virtue, and pursuing
Without which--what were chastity?
Lawyers--judges--old hobnobbers
Are there--bailiffs--chancellors--
Bishops--great and little robbers--
Men of glory in the wars,--
Things whose trade is, over ladies
To lean, and flirt, and stare, and simper,
Till all that is divine in woman
Crucified 'twixt a smile and whimper.
Thrusting, toiling, wailing, moiling,
Frowning, preaching--such a riot!
Each with never-ceasing labour,
Cheating his own heart of quiet.
And all these meet at levees;--
Dinners convivial and political;--
Suppers of epic poets;--teas,
Breakfasts professional and critical;
Lunches and snacks so aldermanic
That one would furnish forth ten dinners,
Where reigns a Cretan-tongued panic,
Should make some losers, and some winners--
At conversazioni--balls--
Conventicles--and drawing-rooms--
Courts of law--committees--calls
Churches--masquerades--and tombs.
And this is Hell--and in this smother
All are damnable and damned;
Each one damning, damns the other;
By none other are they damned.
'Tis a lie to say, 'God damns'!
Where was Heaven's Attorney General
When they first gave out such flams?
They are mines of poisonous mineral.
Statesmen damn themselves to be
Cursed; and lawyers damn their souls
To the auction of a fee;
God's sweet love in burning coals.
The rich are damned, beyond all cure,
To taunt, and starve, and trample on
The weak and wretched; and the poor
Stripe on stripe, with groan on groan.
Sometimes the poor are damned indeed
To take,--not means for being blessed,--
But Cobbett's snuff, revenge; that weed
Squeeze less than they before possessed.
And some few, like we know who,
Damned--but God alone knows why--
To believe their minds are given
In which faith they live and die.
Thus, as in a town, plague-stricken,
Each man be he sound or no
Must indifferently sicken;
None knows a pigeon from a crow,--
So good and bad, sane and mad,
The oppressor and the oppressed;
Those who weep to see what others
Lovers, haters, worst and best;
All are damned--they breathe an air,
Thick, infected, joy-dispelling:
Each pursues what seems most fair,
Scoop palace-caverns vast, where Care
In throned state is ever dwelling.
Lo. Peter in Hell's Grosvenor Square,
A footman in the Devil's service!
That every man in service there
To virtue would prefer vice.
But Peter, though now damned, was not
What Peter was before damnation.
Men oftentimes prepare a lot                                    270
Which ere it finds them, is not what
Suits with their genuine station.
All things that Peter saw and felt
Had a peculiar aspect to him;
And when they came within the belt                              275
Of his own nature, seemed to melt,
Like cloud to cloud, into him.
And so the outward world uniting
To that within him, he became
Considerably uninviting                                         280
To those who, meditation slighting,
Were moulded in a different frame.
And he scorned them, and they scorned him;
And he scorned all they did; and they
Did all that men of their own trim                              285
Are wont to do to please their whim,
Drinking, lying, swearing, play.
Such were his fellow-servants; thus
His virtue, like our own, was built
Too much on that indignant fuss                                 290
Hypocrite Pride stirs up in us
To bully one another's guilt.
He had a mind which was somehow
At once circumference and centre
Of all he might or feel or know;                                295
Nothing went ever out, although
Something did ever enter.
He had as much imagination
As a pint-pot;--he never could
Fancy another situation,                                        300
From which to dart his contemplation,
Than that wherein he stood.
Yet his was individual mind,
And new created all he saw
In a new manner, and refined                                    305
Those new creations, and combined
Them, by a master-spirit's law.
Thus--though unimaginative--
An apprehension clear, intense,
Of his mind's work, had made alive                              310
The things it wrought on; I believe
Wakening a sort of thought in sense.
But from the first 'twas Peter's drift
To be a kind of moral eunuch,
He touched the hem of Nature's shift,                           315
Felt faint--and never dared uplift
The closest, all-concealing tunic.
She laughed the while, with an arch smile,
And kissed him with a sister's kiss,
And said--My best Diogenes,                                     320
I love you well--but, if you please,
Tempt not again my deepest bliss.
''Tis you are cold--for I, not coy,
Yield love for love, frank, warm, and true;
And Burns, a Scottish peasant boy--                             325
His errors prove it--knew my joy
More, learned friend, than you.
'Boeca bacciata non perde ventura,
Anzi rinnuova come fa la luna:--
So thought Boccaccio, whose sweet words might cure a            330
Male prude, like you, from what you now endure, a
Low-tide in soul, like a stagnant laguna.
Then Peter rubbed his eyes severe.
And smoothed his spacious forehead down
With his broad palm;--'twixt love and fear,                     335
He looked, as he no doubt felt, queer,
And in his dream sate down.
The Devil was no uncommon creature;
A leaden-witted thief--just huddled
Out of the dross and scum of nature;                            340
A toad-like lump of limb and feature,
With mind, and heart, and fancy muddled.
He was that heavy, dull, cold thing,
The spirit of evil well may be:
A drone too base to have a sting;                               345
Who gluts, and grimes his lazy wing,
And calls lust, luxury.
Now he was quite the kind of wight
Round whom collect, at a fixed aera,
Venison, turtle, hock, and claret,--                            350
Good cheer--and those who come to share it--
And best East Indian madeira!
It was his fancy to invite
Men of science, wit, and learning,
Who came to lend each other light;                              355
He proudly thought that his gold's might
Had set those spirits burning.
And men of learning, science, wit,
Considered him as you and I
Think of some rotten tree, and sit                              360
Lounging and dining under it,
Exposed to the wide sky.
And all the while with loose fat smile,
The willing wretch sat winking there,
Believing 'twas his power that made                             365
That jovial scene--and that all paid
Homage to his unnoticed chair.
Though to be sure this place was Hell;
He was the Devil--and all they--
What though the claret circled well,                            370
And wit, like ocean, rose and fell?--
Were damned eternally.
Among the guests who often stayed
Till the Devil's petits-soupers,
A man there came, fair as a maid,                               375
And Peter noted what he said,
Standing behind his master's chair.
He was a mighty poet--and
A subtle-souled psychologist;
All things he seemed to understand,                             380
Of old or new--of sea or land--
But his own mind--which was a mist.
This was a man who might have turned
Hell into Heaven--and so in gladness
A Heaven unto himself have earned;                              385
But he in shadows undiscerned
Trusted.--and damned himself to madness.
He spoke of poetry, and how
'Divine it was--a light--a love--
A spirit which like wind doth blow                              390
As it listeth, to and fro;
A dew rained down from God above;
'A power which comes and goes like dream,
And which none can ever trace--
Heaven's light on earth--Truth's brightest beam.'               395
And when he ceased there lay the gleam
Of those words upon his face.
Now Peter, when he heard such talk,
Would, heedless of a broken pate,
Stand like a man asleep, or balk                                400
Some wishing guest of knife or fork,
Or drop and break his master's plate.
At night he oft would start and wake
Like a lover, and began
In a wild measure songs to make                                 405
On moor, and glen, and rocky lake,
And on the heart of man--
And on the universal sky--
And the wide earth's bosom green,--
And the sweet, strange mystery                                  410
Of what beyond these things may lie,
And yet remain unseen.
For in his thought he visited
The spots in which, ere dead and damned,
He his wayward life had led;                                    415
Yet knew not whence the thoughts were fed
Which thus his fancy crammed.
And these obscure remembrances
Stirred such harmony in Peter,
That, whensoever he should please,                              420
He could speak of rocks and trees
In poetic metre.
For though it was without a sense
Of memory, yet he remembered well
Many a ditch and quick-set fence;                               425
Of lakes he had intelligence,
He knew something of heath and fell.
He had also dim recollections
Of pedlars tramping on their rounds;
Milk-pans and pails; and odd collections                        430
Of saws, and proverbs; and reflections
Old parsons make in burying-grounds.
But Peter's verse was clear, and came
Announcing from the frozen hearth
Of a cold age, that none might tame                             435
The soul of that diviner flame
It augured to the Earth:
Like gentle rains, on the dry plains,
Making that green which late was gray,
Or like the sudden moon, that stains                            440
Some gloomy chamber's window-panes
With a broad light like day.
For language was in Peter's hand
Like clay while he was yet a potter;
And he made songs for all the land,                             445
Sweet both to feel and understand,
As pipkins late to mountain Cotter.
And Mr. --, the bookseller,
Gave twenty pounds for some;--then scorning
A footman's yellow coat to wear,                                450
Peter, too proud of heart, I fear,
Instantly gave the Devil warning.
Whereat the Devil took offence,
And swore in his soul a great oath then,
'That for his damned impertinence                               455
He'd bring him to a proper sense
Of what was due to gentlemen!'
'O that mine enemy had written
A book!'--cried Job:--a fearful curse,
If to the Arab, as the Briton,                                  460
'Twas galling to be critic-bitten:--
The Devil to Peter wished no worse.
When Peter's next new book found vent,
The Devil to all the first Reviews
A copy of it slyly sent,                                        465
With five-pound note as compliment,
And this short notice--'Pray abuse.'
Then seriatim, month and quarter,
Appeared such mad tirades.--One said--
'Peter seduced Mrs. Foy's daughter,                             470
Then drowned the mother in Ullswater,
The last thing as he went to bed.'
Another--'Let him shave his head!
Where's Dr. Willis?--Or is he joking?
What does the rascal mean or hope,                              475
No longer imitating Pope,
In that barbarian Shakespeare poking?'
One more, 'Is incest not enough?
And must there be adultery too?
Grace after meat? Miscreant and Liar!                           480
Thief! Blackguard! Scoundrel! Fool! hell-fire
Is twenty times too good for you.
'By that last book of yours WE think
You've double damned yourself to scorn;
We warned you whilst yet on the brink                           485
You stood. From your black name will shrink
The babe that is unborn.'
All these Reviews the Devil made
Up in a parcel, which he had
Safely to Peter's house conveyed.                               490
For carriage, tenpence Peter paid--
Untied them--read them--went half mad.
'What!' cried he, 'this is my reward
For nights of thought, and days, of toil?
Do poets, but to be abhorred                                    495
By men of whom they never heard,
Consume their spirits' oil?
'What have I done to them?--and who
IS Mrs. Foy? 'Tis very cruel
To speak of me and Betty so!                                    500
Adultery! God defend me! Oh!
I've half a mind to fight a duel.
'Or,' cried he, a grave look collecting,
'Is it my genius, like the moon,
Sets those who stand her face inspecting,                       505
That face within their brain reflecting,
Like a crazed bell-chime, out of tune?'
For Peter did not know the town,
But thought, as country readers do,
For half a guinea or a crown,                                   510
He bought oblivion or renown
From God's own voice in a review.
All Peter did on this occasion
Was, writing some sad stuff in prose.
It is a dangerous invasion                                      515
When poets criticize; their station
Is to delight, not pose.
The Devil then sent to Leipsic fair
For Born's translation of Kant's book;
A world of words, tail foremost, where                          520
Right--wrong--false--true--and foul--and fair
As in a lottery-wheel are shook.
Five thousand crammed octavo pages
Of German psychologics,--he
Who his furor verborum assuages                                 525
Thereon, deserves just seven months' wages
More than will e'er be due to me.
I looked on them nine several days,
And then I saw that they were bad;
A friend, too, spoke in their dispraise,--                      530
He never read them;--with amaze
I found Sir William Drummond had.
When the book came, the Devil sent
It to P. Verbovale, Esquire,
With a brief note of compliment,                                535
By that night's Carlisle mail. It went,
And set his soul on fire.
Fire, which ex luce praebens fumum,
Made him beyond the bottom see
Of truth's clear well--when I and you, Ma'am,                   540
Go, as we shall do, subter humum,
We may know more than he.
Now Peter ran to seed in soul
Into a walking paradox;
For he was neither part nor whole,                              545
Nor good, nor bad--nor knave nor fool;
--Among the woods and rocks
Furious he rode, where late he ran,
Lashing and spurring his tame hobby;
Turned to a formal puritan,                                     550
A solemn and unsexual man,--
He half believed "White Obi".
This steed in vision he would ride,
High trotting over nine-inch bridges,
With Flibbertigibbet, imp of pride,                             555
Mocking and mowing by his side--
A mad-brained goblin for a guide--
Over corn-fields, gates, and hedges.
After these ghastly rides, he came
Home to his heart, and found from thence                        560
Much stolen of its accustomed flame;
His thoughts grew weak, drowsy, and lame
Of their intelligence.
To Peter's view, all seemed one hue;
He was no Whig, he was no Tory;                                 565
No Deist and no Christian he;--
He got so subtle, that to be
Nothing, was all his glory.
One single point in his belief
From his organization sprung,                                   570
The heart-enrooted faith, the chief
Ear in his doctrines' blighted sheaf,
That 'Happiness is wrong';
So thought Calvin and Dominic;
So think their fierce successors, who                           575
Even now would neither stint nor stick
Our flesh from off our bones to pick,
If they might 'do their do.'
His morals thus were undermined:--
The old Peter--the hard, old Potter--                           580
Was born anew within his mind;
He grew dull, harsh, sly, unrefined,
As when he tramped beside the Otter.
In the death hues of agony
Lambently flashing from a fish,                                 585
Now Peter felt amused to see
Shades like a rainbow's rise and flee,
Mixed with a certain hungry wish.
So in his Country's dying face
He looked--and, lovely as she lay,                              590
Seeking in vain his last embrace,
Wailing her own abandoned case,
With hardened sneer he turned away:
And coolly to his own soul said;--
'Do you not think that we might make                            595
A poem on her when she's dead:--
Or, no--a thought is in my head--
Her shroud for a new sheet I'll take:
'My wife wants one.--Let who will bury
This mangled corpse! And I and you,                             600
My dearest Soul, will then make merry,
As the Prince Regent did with Sherry,--'
'Ay--and at last desert me too.'
And so his Soul would not be gay,
But moaned within him; like a fawn                              605
Moaning within a cave, it lay
Wounded and wasting, day by day,
Till all its life of life was gone.
As troubled skies stain waters clear,
The storm in Peter's heart and mind                             610
Now made his verses dark and queer:
They were the ghosts of what they were,
Shaking dim grave-clothes in the wind.
For he now raved enormous folly,
Of Baptisms, Sunday-schools, and Graves,                        615
'Twould make George Colman melancholy
To have heard him, like a male Molly,
Chanting those stupid staves.
Yet the Reviews, who heaped abuse
On Peter while he wrote for freedom,                            620
So soon as in his song they spy
The folly which soothes tyranny,
Praise him, for those who feed 'em.
'He was a man, too great to scan;--
A planet lost in truth's keen rays:--                           625
His virtue, awful and prodigious;--
He was the most sublime, religious,
Pure-minded Poet of these days.'
As soon as he read that, cried Peter,
'Eureka! I have found the way                                   630
To make a better thing of metre
Than e'er was made by living creature
Up to this blessed day.'
Then Peter wrote odes to the Devil;--
In one of which he meekly said:                                 635
'May Carnage and Slaughter,
Thy niece and thy daughter,
May Rapine and Famine,
Thy gorge ever cramming,
Glut thee with living and dead!                                 640
'May Death and Damnation,
And Consternation,
Flit up from Hell with pure intent!
Slash them at Manchester,
Glasgow, Leeds, and Chester;                                    645
Drench all with blood from Avon to Trent.
'Let thy body-guard yeomen
Hew down babes and women,
And laugh with bold triumph till Heaven be rent!
When Moloch in Jewry                                            650
Munched children with fury,
It was thou, Devil, dining with pure intent.
The Devil now knew his proper cue.--
Soon as he read the ode, he drove
To his friend Lord MacMurderchouse's,                           655
A man of interest in both houses,
And said:--'For money or for love,
'Pray find some cure or sinecure;
To feed from the superfluous taxes
A friend of ours--a poet--fewer                                 660
Have fluttered tamer to the lure
Than he.' His lordship stands and racks his
Stupid brains, while one might count
As many beads as he had boroughs,--
At length replies; from his mean front,                         665
Like one who rubs out an account,
Smoothing away the unmeaning furrows:
'It happens fortunately, dear Sir,
I can. I hope I need require
No pledge from you, that he will stir                           670
In our affairs;--like Oliver.
That he'll be worthy of his hire.'
These words exchanged, the news sent off
To Peter, home the Devil hied,--
Took to his bed; he had no cough,                               675
No doctor,--meat and drink enough.--
Yet that same night he died.
The Devil's corpse was leaded down;
His decent heirs enjoyed his pelf,
Mourning-coaches, many a one,                                   680
Followed his hearse along the town:--
Where was the Devil himself?
When Peter heard of his promotion,
His eyes grew like two stars for bliss:
There was a bow of sleek devotion                               685
Engendering in his back; each motion
Seemed a Lord's shoe to kiss.
He hired a house, bought plate, and made
A genteel drive up to his door,
With sifted gravel neatly laid,--                               690
As if defying all who said,
Peter was ever poor.
But a disease soon struck into
The very life and soul of Peter--
He walked about--slept--had the hue                             695
Of health upon his cheeks--and few
Dug better--none a heartier eater.
And yet a strange and horrid curse
Clung upon Peter, night and day;
Month after month the thing grew worse,                         700
And deadlier than in this my verse
I can find strength to say.
Peter was dull--he was at first
Dull--oh, so dull--so very dull!
Whether he talked, wrote, or rehearsed--                        705
Still with this dulness was he cursed--
Dull--beyond all conception--dull.
No one could read his books--no mortal,
But a few natural friends, would hear him;
The parson came not near his portal;                            710
His state was like that of the immortal
Described by Swift--no man could bear him.
His sister, wife, and children yawned,
With a long, slow, and drear ennui,
All human patience far beyond;                                  715
Their hopes of Heaven each would have pawned,
Anywhere else to be.
But in his verse, and in his prose,
The essence of his dulness was
Concentred and compressed so close,                             720
'Twould have made Guatimozin doze
On his red gridiron of brass.
A printer's boy, folding those pages,
Fell slumbrously upon one side;
Like those famed Seven who slept three ages.                    725
To wakeful frenzy's vigil--rages,
As opiates, were the same applied.
Even the Reviewers who were hired
To do the work of his reviewing,
With adamantine nerves, grew tired;--                           730
Gaping and torpid they retired,
To dream of what they should be doing.
And worse and worse, the drowsy curse
Yawned in him, till it grew a pest--
A wide contagious atmosphere,                                   735
Creeping like cold through all things near;
A power to infect and to infest.
His servant-maids and dogs grew dull;
His kitten, late a sportive elf;
The woods and lakes, so beautiful,                              740
Of dim stupidity were full.
All grew dull as Peter's self.
The earth under his feet--the springs,
Which lived within it a quick life,
The air, the winds of many wings,                               745
That fan it with new murmurings,
Were dead to their harmonious strife.
The birds and beasts within the wood,
The insects, and each creeping thing,
Were now a silent multitude;                                    750
Love's work was left unwrought--no brood
Near Peter's house took wing.
And every neighbouring cottager
Stupidly yawned upon the other:
No jackass brayed; no little cur                                755
Cocked up his ears;--no man would stir
To save a dying mother.
Yet all from that charmed district went
But some half-idiot and half-knave,
Who rather than pay any rent,                                   760
Would live with marvellous content,
Over his father's grave.
No bailiff dared within that space,
For fear of the dull charm, to enter;
A man would bear upon his face,                                 765
For fifteen months in any case,
The yawn of such a venture.
Seven miles above--below--around--
This pest of dulness holds its sway;
A ghastly life without a sound;                                 770
To Peter's soul the spell is bound--
How should it ever pass away?