Printers
Contents
Illustrations
_Facing page_
"_Shinne-Shinne_" also called _Yama-Zemi_, and
_Kuma-Zemi_.
_Aburazemi._
"_Kutsu-kutsu-Boshi_," etc. (_Cosmopsaltria
Opalifera?_)
Il avait vu bruler d'etranges pierres,
Jadis, dans les brasiers de la pensee ...
entitled _Konseki-Monogatari_
THERE was a young Samurai of Kyoto who had been reduced to poverty by
the ruin of his lord, and found himself obliged to leave his home, and
to take service with the Governor of a distant province. Before quitting
the capital, this Samurai divorced his wife,--a good and beautiful
woman,--under the belief that he could better obtain promotion by
another alliance. He then married the daughter of a family of some
distinction, and took her with him to the district whither he had been
called.
But it was in the time of the thoughtlessness of youth, and the sharp
experience of want, that the Samurai could not understand the worth of
the affection so lightly cast away. His second marriage did not prove a
happy one; the character of his new wife was hard and selfish; and he
soon found every cause to think with regret of Kyoto days. Then he
discovered that he still loved his first wife--loved her more than he
could ever love the second; and he began to feel how unjust and how
thankless he had been. Gradually his repentance deepened into a remorse
that left him no peace of mind. Memories of the woman he had
wronged--her gentle speech, her smiles, her dainty, pretty ways, her
faultless patience--continually haunted him. Sometimes in dreams he saw
her at her loom, weaving as when she toiled night and day to help him
during the years of their distress: more often he saw her kneeling alone
in the desolate little room where he had left her, veiling her tears
with her poor worn sleeve. Even in the hours of official duty, his
thoughts would wander back to her: then he would ask himself how she was
living, what she was doing. Something in his heart assured him that she
could not accept another husband, and that she never would refuse to
pardon him. And he secretly resolved to seek her out as soon as he could
return to Kyoto,--then to beg her forgiveness, to take her back, to do
everything that a man could do to make atonement. But the years went
by.
At last the Governor's official term expired, and the Samurai was free.
"Now I will go back to my dear one," he vowed to himself. "Ah, what a
cruelty,--what a folly to have divorced her!" He sent his second wife to
her own people (she had given him no children); and hurrying to Kyoto,
he went at once to seek his former companion,--not allowing himself even
the time to change his travelling-garb.
When he reached the street where she used to live, it was late in the
night,--the night of the tenth day of the ninth month;--and the city was
silent as a cemetery. But a bright moon made everything visible; and he
found the house without difficulty. It had a deserted look: tall weeds
were growing on the roof. He knocked at the sliding-doors, and no one
answered. Then, finding that the doors had not been fastened from
within, he pushed them open, and entered. The front room was matless and
empty: a chilly wind was blowing through crevices in the planking; and
the moon shone through a ragged break in the wall of the alcove. Other
rooms presented a like forlorn condition. The house, to all seeming, was
unoccupied. Nevertheless, the Samurai determined to visit one other
apartment at the further end of the dwelling,--a very small room that
had been his wife's favorite resting-place. Approaching the
sliding-screen that closed it, he was startled to perceive a glow
within. He pushed the screen aside, and uttered a cry of joy; for he saw
her there,--sewing by the light of a paper-lamp. Her eyes at the same
instant met his own; and with a happy smile she greeted him,--asking
only:--"When did you come back to Kyoto? How did you find your way here
to me, through all those black rooms?" The years had not changed her.
Still she seemed as fair and young as in his fondest memory of her;--but
sweeter than any memory there came to him the music of her voice, with
its trembling of pleased wonder.
Then joyfully he took his place beside her, and told her all:--how
deeply he repented his selfishness,--how wretched he had been without
her,--how constantly he had regretted her,--how long he had hoped and
planned to make amends;--caressing her the while, and asking her
forgiveness over and over again. She answered him, with loving
gentleness, according to his heart's desire,--entreating him to cease
all self-reproach. It was wrong, she said, that he should have allowed
himself to suffer on her account: she had always felt that she was not
worthy to be his wife. She knew that he had separated from her,
notwithstanding, only because of poverty; and while he lived with her,
he had always been kind; and she had never ceased to pray for his
happiness. But even if there had been a reason for speaking of amends,
this honorable visit would be ample amends;--what greater happiness than
thus to see him again, though it were only for a moment? "Only for a
moment!" he answered, with a glad laugh,--"say, rather, for the time of
seven existences! My loved one, unless you forbid, I am coming back to
live with you always--always--always! Nothing shall ever separate us
again. Now I have means and friends: we need not fear poverty. To-morrow
my goods will be brought here; and my servants will come to wait upon
you; and we shall make this house beautiful.... To-night," he added,
apologetically, "I came thus late--without even changing my dress--only
because of the longing I had to see you, and to tell you this." She
seemed greatly pleased by these words; and in her turn she told him
about all that had happened in Kyoto since the time of his
departure,--excepting her own sorrows, of which she sweetly refused to
speak. They chatted far into the night: then she conducted him to a
warmer room, facing south,--a room that had been their bridal chamber in
former time. "Have you no one in the house to help you?" he asked, as
she began to prepare the couch for him. "No," she answered, laughing
cheerfully: "I could not afford a servant;--so I have been living all
alone." "You will have plenty of servants to-morrow," he said,--"good
servants,--and everything else that you need." They lay down to
rest,--not to sleep: they had too much to tell each other;--and they
talked of the past and the present and the future, until the dawn was
grey. Then, involuntarily, the Samurai closed his eyes, and slept.
When he awoke, the daylight was streaming through the chinks of the
sliding-shutters; and he found himself, to his utter amazement, lying
upon the naked boards of a mouldering floor.... Had he only dreamed a
dream? No: she was there;--she slept.... He bent above her,--and
looked,--and shrieked;--for the sleeper had no face!... Before him,
wrapped in its grave-sheet only, lay the corpse of a woman,--a corpse so
wasted that little remained save the bones, and the long black tangled
hair.
Slowly,--as he stood shuddering and sickening in the sun,--the icy
horror yielded to a despair so intolerable, a pain so atrocious, that he
clutched at the mocking shadow of a doubt. Feigning ignorance of the
neighborhood, he ventured to ask his way to the house in which his wife
had lived.
"There is no one in that house," said the person questioned. "It used to
belong to the wife of a Samurai who left the city several years ago. He
divorced her in order to marry another woman before he went away; and
she fretted a great deal, and so became sick. She had no relatives in
Kyoto, and nobody to care for her; and she died in the autumn of the
same year,--on the tenth day of the ninth month...."
THERE was once a very pious and learned priest, called Shoku Shonin, who
lived in the province of Harima. For many years he meditated daily upon
Sutra of the Lotos of the Good Law; and he used to pray, every morning
and evening, that he might at some time be permitted to behold
Fugen-Bosatsu as a living presence, and in the form described in the
recorded in the chapter entitled "The Encouragement of
Samantabhadra" (see Kern's translation of the Saddharma
Pundarika in the _Sacred Books of the East_,--pp.
said to the Lord: ... 'When a preacher who applies himself
to this Dharmaparyaya shall take a walk, then, O Lord, will
I mount a white elephant with six tusks, and betake myself
to the place where that preacher is walking, in order to
protect this Dharmaparyaya. And when that preacher, applying
himself to this Dharmaparyaya, forgets, be it but a single
word or syllable, then will I mount the white elephant with
six tusks, and show my face to that preacher, and repeat
this entire Dharmaparyaya."--But these promises refer to
"the end of time."
One evening, while he was reciting the Sutra, drowsiness overcame him;
in his dream a voice told him that, in order to see Fugen-Bosatsu,
he must go to the house of a certain courtesan, known as the
awakening he resolved to go to Kanzaki;--and, making all possible haste,
he reached the town by the evening of the next day.
upon which the priest leans one arm while reading. The use
of such an arm-rest is not confined, however, to the
Buddhist clergy.
courtesan. The term "Yujo-no-Choja," in this case, would
mean simply "the first (or best) of yujo."
When he entered the house of the _yujo_, he found many persons already
there assembled--mostly young men of the capital, who had been attracted
to Kanzaki by the fame of the woman's beauty. They were feasting and
drinking; and the _yujo_ was playing a small hand-drum (_tsuzumi_),
which she used very skilfully, and singing a song. The song which she
sang was an old Japanese song about a famous shrine in the town of
Murozumi; and the words were these:--
Even though no wind be blowing,
The surface of the water is always rippling._
especially given to the water-tanks, or water-fonts--of
stone or bronze--placed before Shinto shrines in order
that the worshipper may purify his lips and hands before
making prayer. Buddhist tanks are not so named.
The sweetness of the voice filled everybody with surprise and delight.
As the priest, who had taken a place apart, listened and wondered, the
girl suddenly fixed her eyes upon him; and in the same instant he saw
her form change into the form of Fugen-Bosatsu, emitting from her brow a
beam of light that seemed to pierce beyond the limits of the universe,
and riding a snow-white elephant with six tusks. And still she sang--but
the song also was now transformed; and the words came thus to the ears
of the priest:--
_On the Vast Sea of Cessation,
Though the Winds of the Six Desires and of the Five Corruptions
never blow,
Yet the surface of that deep is always covered
With the billowings of Attainment to the Reality-in-Itself._
Dazzled by the divine ray, the priest closed his eyes: but through their
lids he still distinctly saw the vision. When he opened them again, it
was gone: he saw only the girl with her hand-drum, and heard only the
song about the water of Murozumi. But he found that as often as he shut
his eyes he could see Fugen-Bosatsu on the six-tusked elephant, and
could hear the mystic Song of the Sea of Cessation. The other persons
present saw only the _yujo_: they had not beheld the manifestation.
Then the singer suddenly disappeared from the banquet-room--none could
say when or how. From that moment the revelry ceased; and gloom took
the place of joy. After having waited and sought for the girl to no
purpose, the company dispersed in great sorrow. Last of all, the priest
departed, bewildered by the emotions of the evening. But scarcely had
he passed beyond the gate, when the _yujo_ appeared before him, and
said:--"Friend, do not speak yet to any one of what you have seen this
night." And with these words she vanished away,--leaving the air filled
with a delicious fragrance.
The monk by whom the foregoing legend was recorded, comments upon it
thus:--The condition of a _yujo_ is low and miserable, since she is
condemned to serve the lusts of men. Who therefore could imagine
that such a woman might be the _nirmanakaya_, or incarnation, of a
Bodhisattva. But we must remember that the Buddhas and the Bodhisattvas
may appear in this world in countless different forms; choosing,
for the purpose of their divine compassion, even the most humble or
contemptible shapes when such shapes can serve them to lead men into
the true path, and to save them from the perils of illusion.
"In Chinese and in Japanese books there are related many stories,--both
of ancient and of modern times,--about pictures that were so beautiful
as to exercise a magical influence upon the beholder. And concerning
such beautiful pictures,--whether pictures of flowers or of birds or of
people, painted by famous artists,--it is further told that the shapes
of the creatures or the persons, therein depicted, would separate
themselves from the paper or the silk upon which they had been painted,
and would perform various acts;--so that they became, by their own will,
really alive. We shall not now repeat any of the stories of this
class which have been known to everybody from ancient times. But
even in modern times the fame of the pictures painted by Hishigawa
Kichibei--'Hishigawa's Portraits'--has become widespread in the land."
to whom he refers--better known to collectors as Hishigawa
Kichibei Moronobu--flourished during the latter part of the
seventeenth century. Beginning his career as a dyer's
apprentice, he won his reputation as an artist about 1680,
when he may be said to have founded the _Ukiyo-ye_ school of
illustration. Hishigawa was especially a delineator of what
are called _furyu_, ("elegant manners"),--the aspects of
life among the upper classes of society.
He then proceeds to relate the following story about one of the
so-called portraits:--
There was a young scholar of Kyoto whose name was Tokkei. He
used to live in the street called Muromachi. One evening,
while on his way home after a visit, his attention was attracted
by an old single-leaf screen (_tsuitate_), exposed for sale
before the shop of a dealer in second-hand goods. It was only
a paper-covered screen; but there was painted upon it the
full-length figure of a girl which caught the young man's
fancy. The price asked was very small: Tokkei bought the
screen, and took it home with him.
When he looked again at the screen, in the solitude of his
own room, the picture seemed to him much more beautiful than
before. Apparently it was a real likeness,--the portrait of a
girl fifteen or sixteen years old; and every little detail
in the painting of the hair, eyes, eyelashes, mouth, had
been executed with a delicacy and a truth beyond praise. The
lips were "like the smile of a red flower"; the whole young face
was inexpressibly sweet. If the real girl so portrayed had been
equally lovely, no man could have looked upon her without losing
his heart. And Tokkei believed that she must have been thus
lovely;--for the figure seemed alive,--ready to reply to anybody
who might speak to it.
eye. The Japanese (like the old Greek and the old
Arabian poets) have many curious dainty words and
similes to express particular beauties of the hair,
eyes, eyelids, lips, fingers, etc.
Gradually, as he continued to gaze at the picture, he felt
himself bewitched by the charm of it. "Can there really have
been in this world," he murmured to himself, "so delicious a
creature? How gladly would I give my life--nay, a thousand
years of life!--to hold her in my arms even for a moment!" (The
Japanese author says "for a few seconds.") In short, he became
enamoured of the picture,--so much enamoured of it as to feel
that he never could love any woman except the person whom it
represented. Yet that person, if still alive, could no longer
resemble the painting: perhaps she had been buried long before
he was born!
Day by day, nevertheless, this hopeless passion grew upon
him. He could not eat; he could not sleep: neither could he
occupy his mind with those studies which had formerly delighted
him. He would sit for hours before the picture, talking to
it,--neglecting or forgetting everything else. And at last he
fell sick--so sick that he believed himself going to die.
Now among the friends of Tokkei there was one venerable scholar
who knew many strange things about old pictures and about young
hearts. This aged scholar, hearing of Tokkei's illness, came to
visit him, and saw the screen, and understood what had happened.
Then Tokkei, being questioned, confessed everything to his
friend, and declared:--"If I cannot find such a woman, I shall
die."
The old man said:--
"That picture was painted by Hishigawa Kichibei,--painted from
life. The person whom it represented is not now in the world.
But it is said that Hishigawa Kichibei painted her mind as well
as her form, and that her spirit lives in the picture. So I
think that you can win her."
Tokkei half rose from his bed, and stared eagerly at the
speaker.
"You must give her a name," the old man continued;--"and you
must sit before her picture every day, and keep your thoughts
constantly fixed upon her, and call her gently by the name which
you have given her, _until she answers you_...."
"Answers me!" exclaimed the lover, in breathless amazement.
"Oh, yes," the adviser responded, "she will certainly answer
you. But you must be ready, when she answers you, to present her
with what I am going to tell you...."
"I will give her my life!" cried Tokkei.
"No," said the old man;--"you will present her with a cup of
wine that has been bought at one hundred different wine-shops.
Then she will come out of the screen to accept the wine. After
that, probably she herself will tell you what to do."
With these words the old man went away. His advice aroused
Tokkei from despair. At once he seated himself before the
picture, and called it by the name of a girl--(what name the
Japanese narrator has forgotten to tell us)--over and over
again, very tenderly. That day it made no answer, nor the next
day, nor the next. But Tokkei did not lose faith or patience;
and after many days it suddenly one evening answered to its
name,--
"_Hai!_" (Yes.)
Then quickly, quickly, some of the wine from a hundred different
wine-shops was poured out, and reverentially presented in a
little cup. And the girl stepped from the screen, and walked
upon the matting of the room, and knelt to take the cup from
Tokkei's hand,--asking, with a delicious smile:--
"How could you love me so much?"
Says the Japanese narrator: "She was much more beautiful than the
picture,--beautiful to the tips of her finger-nails,--beautiful
also in heart and temper,--lovelier than anybody else in the
world." What answer Tokkei made to her question is not recorded:
it will have to be imagined.
"But will you not soon get tired of me?" she asked.
"Never while I live!" he protested.
"And after--?" she persisted;--for the Japanese bride is not
satisfied with love for one life-time only.
"Let us pledge ourselves to each other," he entreated, "for the
time of seven existences."
"If you are ever unkind to me," she said, "I will go back to the
screen."
They pledged each other. I suppose that Tokkei was a good
boy,--for his bride never returned to the screen. The space that
she had occupied upon it remained a blank.
Exclaims the Japanese author,--
"How very seldom do such things happen in this world!"
THE body was cold as ice; the heart had long ceased to beat: yet there
were no other signs of death. Nobody even spoke of burying the woman.
She had died of grief and anger at having been divorced. It would have
been useless to bury her,--because the last undying wish of a dying
person for vengeance can burst asunder any tomb and rift the heaviest
graveyard stone. People who lived near the house in which she was lying
fled from their homes. They knew that she was only _waiting for the
return of the man who had divorced her_.
At the time of her death he was on a journey. When he came back and was
told what had happened, terror seized him. "If I can find no help before
dark," he thought to himself, "she will tear me to pieces." It was yet
lose.
time, began at about eight o'clock in the morning.
knew the story of the dead woman; and he had seen the body. He said to
the supplicant:--"A very great danger threatens you. I will try to save
you. But you must promise to do whatever I shall tell you to do. There
is only one way by which you can be saved. It is a fearful way. But
unless you find the courage to attempt it, she will tear you limb from
limb. If you can be brave, come to me again in the evening before
sunset." The man shuddered; but he promised to do whatever should be
required of him.
_in-yo_,--the old Chinese nature-philosophy, based upon the
theory of a male and a female principle pervading the
universe.
At sunset the _inyoshi_ went with him to the house where the body was
lying. The _inyoshi_ pushed open the sliding-doors, and told his client
to enter. It was rapidly growing dark. "I dare not!" gasped the man,
quaking from head to foot;--"I dare not even look at her!" "You will
have to do much more than look at her," declared the _inyoshi_;--"and
you promised to obey. Go in!" He forced the trembler into the house and
led him to the side of the corpse.
The dead woman was lying on her face. "Now you must get astride upon
her," said the _inyoshi_, "and sit firmly on her back, as if you were
riding a horse.... Come!--you must do it!" The man shivered so that the
_inyoshi_ had to support him--shivered horribly; but he obeyed. "Now
take her hair in your hands," commanded the _inyoshi_,--"half in the
right hand, half in the left.... So!... You must grip it like a bridle.
Twist your hands in it--both hands--tightly. That is the way!... Listen
to me! You must stay like that till morning. You will have reason to be
afraid in the night--plenty of reason. But whatever may happen, never
let go of her hair. If you let go,--even for one second,--she will tear
you into gobbets!"
The _inyoshi_ then whispered some mysterious words into the ear of the
body, and said to its rider:--"Now, for my own sake, I must leave you
alone with her.... Remain as you are!... Above all things, remember that
you must not let go of her hair." And he went away,--closing the doors
behind him.
Hour after hour the man sat upon the corpse in black fear;--and the hush
of the night deepened and deepened about him till he screamed to break
it. Instantly the body sprang beneath him, as to cast him off; and the
dead woman cried out loudly, "Oh, how heavy it is! Yet I shall bring
that fellow here now!"
Then tall she rose, and leaped to the doors, and flung them open, and
rushed into the night,--always bearing the weight of the man. But he,
shutting his eyes, kept his hands twisted in her long hair,--tightly,
tightly,--though fearing with such a fear that he could not even moan.
How far she went, he never knew. He saw nothing: he heard only the sound
of her naked feet in the dark,--_picha-picha_, _picha-picha_,--and the
hiss of her breathing as she ran.
At last she turned, and ran back into the house, and lay down upon the
floor exactly as at first. Under the man she panted and moaned till the
cocks began to crow. Thereafter she lay still.
But the man, with chattering teeth, sat upon her until the _inyoshi_
came at sunrise. "So you did not let go of her hair!"--observed the
_inyoshi_, greatly pleased. "That is well ... Now you can stand up." He
whispered again into the ear of the corpse, and then said to the
man:--"You must have passed a fearful night; but nothing else could have
saved you. Hereafter you may feel secure from her vengeance."
The conclusion of this story I do not think to be morally satisfying.
It is not recorded that the corpse-rider became insane, or that his
hair turned white: we are told only that "he worshipped the _inyoshi_
with tears of gratitude." A note appended to the recital is equally
disappointing. "It is reported," the Japanese author says, "that a
grandson of the _inyoshi_ is at this very time living in a village
This village-name does not appear in any Japanese directory of to-day.
But the names of many towns and villages have been changed since the
foregoing story was written.
IN Kyoto there is a famous temple called Amadera. Sadazumi Shinno, the
fifth son of the Emperor Seiwa, passed the greater part of his life
there as a priest; and the graves of many celebrated persons are to be
seen in the temple-grounds.
But the present edifice is not the ancient Amadera. The original temple,
after the lapse of ten centuries, fell into such decay that it had to be
entirely rebuilt in the fourteenth year of Genroku (1701 A. D.).
A great festival was held to celebrate the rebuilding of the Amadera;
and among the thousands of persons who attended that festival there was
a young scholar and poet named Hanagaki Baishu. He wandered about the
newly-laid-out grounds and gardens, delighted by all that he saw, until
he reached the place of a spring at which he had often drunk in former
times. He was then surprised to find that the soil about the spring had
been dug away, so as to form a square pond, and that at one corner of
this pond there had been set up a wooden tablet bearing the words
handsome temple of the Goddess Benten had been erected beside the pond.
While he was looking at this new temple, a sudden gust of wind blew to
Shirushi areto
Iwai zo somuru
Tama hoki,
Torute bakari no
Chigiri naretomo.
mystical Buddhist meaning of new life or rebirth, rather
than in the western signification of birth.
of paper, usually colored, upon which poems are written
perpendicularly. Poems written upon _tanzaku_ are suspended
to trees in flower, to wind-bells, to any beautiful object
in which the poet has found an inspiration.
This poem--a poem on first love (_hatsu koi_), composed by the famous
Shunrei Kyo--was not unfamiliar to him; but it had been written upon
the _tanzaku_ by a female hand, and so exquisitely that he could
scarcely believe his eyes. Something in the form of the characters,--an
indefinite grace,--suggested that period of youth between childhood and
womanhood; and the pure rich color of the ink seemed to bespeak the
distinguish in Chinese or Japanese writing those
characteristics implied by our term "hand"--in the sense of
individual style. But the Japanese scholar never forgets
the peculiarities of a handwriting once seen; and he can
even guess at the approximate age of the writer. Chinese
and Japanese authors claim that the color (quality) of the
ink used tells something of the character of the writer. As
every person grounds or prepares his or her own ink, the
deeper and clearer black would at least indicate something
of personal carefulness and of the sense of beauty.
Baishu carefully folded up the _tanzaku_, and took it home with him.
When he looked at it again the writing appeared to him even more
wonderful than at first. His knowledge in caligraphy assured him only
that the poem had been written by some girl who was very young, very
intelligent, and probably very gentle-hearted. But this assurance
sufficed to shape within his mind the image of a very charming person;
and he soon found himself in love with the unknown. Then his first
resolve was to seek out the writer of the verses, and, if possible, make
her his wife.... Yet how was he to find her? Who was she? Where did she
live? Certainly he could hope to find her only through the favor of the
Gods.
But presently it occurred to him that the Gods might be very willing
to lend their aid. The _tanzaku_ had come to him while he was
standing in front of the temple of Benten-Sama; and it was to this
divinity in particular that lovers were wont to pray for happy union.
This reflection impelled him to beseech the Goddess for assistance.
He went at once to the temple of Benten-of-the-Birth-Water
(_Tanjo-sui-no-Benten_) in the grounds of the Amadera; and there, with
all the fervor of his heart, he made his petition:--"O Goddess, pity
me!--help me to find where the young person lives who wrote the
_tanzaku_!--vouchsafe me but one chance to meet her,--even if only for
a moment!" And after having made this prayer, he began to perform a
Goddess; vowing at the same time to pass the seventh night in ceaseless
worship before her shrine.
The performer of a _nanuka-mairi_ pledges himself to pray
at a certain temple every day for seven days in succession.
Now on the seventh night,--the night of his vigil,--during the hour when
the silence is most deep, he heard at the main gateway of the
temple-grounds a voice calling for admittance. Another voice from within
answered; the gate was opened; and Baishu saw an old man of majestic
appearance approaching with slow steps. This venerable person was clad
in robes of ceremony; and he wore upon his snow-white head a black cap
(_eboshi_) of the form indicating high rank. Reaching the little temple
of Benten, he knelt down in front of it, as if respectfully awaiting
some order. Then the outer door of the temple was opened; the hanging
curtain of bamboo behind it, concealing the inner sanctuary, was rolled
hair tied back in the ancient manner. He stood at the threshold, and
said to the old man in a clear loud voice:--
household, especially an Imperial page. The _chigo_ who
appears in this story is of course a supernatural
being,--the court-messenger of the Goddess, and her
mouthpiece.
"There is a person here who has been praying for a love-union not
suitable to his present condition, and otherwise difficult to bring
about. But as the young man is worthy of Our pity, you have been called
to see whether something can be done for him. If there should prove to
be any relation between the parties from the period of a former birth,
you will introduce them to each other."
On receiving this command, the old man bowed respectfully to the
_chigo_: then, rising, he drew from the pocket of his long left sleeve a
crimson cord. One end of this cord he passed round Baishu's body, as if
to bind him with it. The other end he put into the flame of one of the
temple-lamps; and while the cord was there burning, he waved his hand
three times, as if to summon somebody out of the dark.
Immediately, in the direction of the Amadera, a sound of coming steps
was heard; and in another moment a girl appeared,--a charming girl,
fifteen or sixteen years old. She approached gracefully, but very
shyly,--hiding the lower part of her face with a fan; and she knelt down
beside Baishu. The _chigo_ then said to Baishu:--
"Recently you have been suffering much heart-pain; and this desperate
love of yours has even impaired your health. We could not allow you to
remain in so unhappy a condition; and We therefore summoned the
that _tanzaku_. She is now beside you."
of Marriage, more usually known as _Musubi-no-kami_.
Throughout this story there is an interesting mingling of
Shinto and Buddhist ideas.
With these words, the _chigo_ retired behind the bamboo curtain. Then
the old man went away as he had come; and the young girl followed him.
Simultaneously Baishu heard the great bell of the Amadera sounding the
hour of dawn. He prostrated himself in thanksgiving before the shrine of
Benten-of-the-Birth-Water, and proceeded homeward,--feeling as if
awakened from some delightful dream,--happy at having seen the charming
person whom he had so fervently prayed to meet,--unhappy also because of
the fear that he might never meet her again.
But scarcely had he passed from the gateway into the street, when he saw
a young girl walking alone in the same direction that he was going; and,
even in the dusk of the dawn, he recognized her at once as the person to
whom he had been introduced before the temple of Benten. As he quickened
his pace to overtake her, she turned and saluted him with a graceful
bow. Then for the first time he ventured to speak to her; and she
answered him in a voice of which the sweetness filled his heart with
joy. Through the yet silent streets they walked on, chatting happily,
till they found themselves before the house where Baishu lived. There he
paused--spoke to the girl of his hopes and fears. Smiling, she
asked:--"Do you not know that I was sent for to become your wife?" And
she entered with him.
Becoming his wife, she delighted him beyond expectation by the charm of
her mind and heart. Moreover, he found her to be much more accomplished
than he had supposed. Besides being able to write so wonderfully, she
could paint beautiful pictures; she knew the art of arranging flowers,
the art of embroidery, the art of music; she could weave and sew; and
she knew everything in regard to the management of a house.
It was in the early autumn that the young people had met; and they lived
together in perfect accord until the winter season began. Nothing,
during those months, occurred to disturb their peace. Baishu's love for
his gentle wife only strengthened with the passing of time. Yet,
strangely enough, he remained ignorant of her history,--knew nothing
about her family. Of such matters she had never spoken; and, as the Gods
had given her to him, he imagined that it would not be proper to
question her. But neither the Old-Man-under-the-Moon nor any one else
came--as he had feared--to take her away. Nobody even made any inquiries
about her. And the neighbors, for some undiscoverable reason, acted as
if totally unaware of her presence.
Baishu wondered at all this. But stranger experiences were awaiting
him.
One winter morning he happened to be passing through a somewhat remote
quarter of the city, when he heard himself loudly called by name, and
saw a man-servant making signs to him from the gateway of a private
residence. As Baishu did not know the man's face, and did not have a
single acquaintance in that part of Kyoto, he was more than startled by
so abrupt a summons. But the servant, coming forward, saluted him with
the utmost respect, and said, "My master greatly desires the honor of
speaking with you: deign to enter for a moment." After an instant of
hesitation, Baishu allowed himself to be conducted to the house. A
dignified and richly dressed person, who seemed to be the master,
welcomed him at the entrance, and led him to the guest-room. When the
courtesies due upon a first meeting had been fully exchanged, the host
apologized for the informal manner of his invitation, and said:--
"It must have seemed to you very rude of us to call you in such a way.
But perhaps you will pardon our impoliteness when I tell you that we
acted thus upon what I firmly believe to have been an inspiration from
the Goddess Benten. Now permit me to explain.
"I have a daughter, about sixteen years old, who can write rather
nature of woman. As we were anxious to make her happy by finding a good
husband for her, we prayed the Goddess Benten to help us; and we sent to
every temple of Benten in the city a _tanzaku_ written by the girl. Some
nights later, the Goddess appeared to me in a dream, and said: 'We have
heard your prayer, and have already introduced your daughter to the
person who is to become her husband. During the coming winter he will
visit you.' As I did not understand this assurance that a presentation
had been made, I felt some doubt; I thought that the dream might have
been only a common dream, signifying nothing. But last night again I saw
Benten-Sama in a dream; and she said to me: 'To-morrow the young man, of
whom I once spoke to you, will come to this street: then you can call
him into your house, and ask him to become the husband of your daughter.
He is a good young man; and later in life he will obtain a much higher
rank than he now holds.' Then Benten-Sama told me your name, your age,
your birthplace, and described your features and dress so exactly that
my servant found no difficulty in recognizing you by the indications
which I was able to give him."
depreciatingly of their children's accomplishments the
phrase "rather well" in this connection would mean, for the
visitor, "wonderfully well." For the same reason the
expressions "common way" and "ordinary nature," as
subsequently used, would imply almost the reverse of the
literal meaning.
This explanation bewildered Baishu instead of reassuring him; and his
only reply was a formal return of thanks for the honor which the master
of the house had spoken of doing him. But when the host invited him to
another room, for the purpose of presenting him to the young lady, his
embarrassment became extreme. Yet he could not reasonably decline the
introduction. He could not bring himself, under such extraordinary
circumstances, to announce that he already had a wife,--a wife given to
him by the Goddess Benten herself; a wife from whom he could not even
think of separating. So, in silence and trepidation, he followed his
host to the apartment indicated.
Then what was his amazement to discover, when presented to the daughter
of the house, that she was the very same person whom he had already
taken to wife!
_The same,--yet not the same._
She to whom he had been introduced by the Old-Man-under-the-Moon, was
only the soul of the beloved.
She to whom he was now to be wedded, in her father's house, was the
body.
Benten had wrought this miracle for the sake of her worshippers.
The original story breaks off suddenly at this point, leaving several
matters unexplained. The ending is rather unsatisfactory. One would like
to know something about the mental experiences of the real maiden during
the married life of her phantom. One would also like to know what became
of the phantom,--whether it continued to lead an independent existence;
whether it waited patiently for the return of its husband; whether it
paid a visit to the real bride. And the book says nothing about these
things. But a Japanese friend explains the miracle thus:--
"The spirit-bride was really formed out of the _tanzaku_. So it is
possible that the real girl did not know anything about the meeting at
the temple of Benten. When she wrote those beautiful characters upon the
_tanzaku_, something of her spirit passed into them. Therefore it was
possible to evoke from the writing the double of the writer."
_Kibun-Anbaiyoshi_
THERE was a man named Tawaraya Totaro, who lived in the Province of Omi.
His house was situated on the shore of Lake Biwa, not far from the
famous temple called Ishiyamadera. He had some property, and lived in
comfort; but at the age of twenty-nine he was still unmarried. His
greatest ambition was to marry a very beautiful woman; and he had not
been able to find a girl to his liking.
strange being crouching close to the parapet. The body of this being
resembled the body of a man, but was black as ink; its face was like the
face of a demon; its eyes were green as emeralds; and its beard was like
the beard of a dragon. Totaro was at first very much startled. But the
green eyes looked at him so gently that after a moment's hesitation he
ventured to question the creature. Then it answered him, saying: "I am a
because of a small fault which I committed, I was dismissed from the
Dragon-Palace, and also banished from the Sea. Since then I have been
wandering about here,--unable to get any food, or even a place to lie
down. If you can feel any pity for me, do, I beseech you, help me to
find a shelter, and let me have something to eat!"
Japanese legend, is nearly eight hundred feet in length,
and commands a beautiful view. This bridge crosses the
waters of the Setagawa near the junction of the stream with
Lake Biwa. Ishiyamadera, one of the most picturesque
Buddhist temples in Japan, is situated within a short
distance from the bridge.
_Samebito_ is a male. The characters for _Samebito_ can
also be read _Kojin_,--which is the usual reading. In
dictionaries the word is loosely rendered by "merman" or
"mermaid;" but as the above description shows, the
_Samebito_ or _Kojin_ of the Far East is a conception
having little in common with the Western idea of a merman
or mermaid.
fairy-realm beneath the sea which figures in so many
Japanese legends.
This petition was uttered in so plaintive a tone, and in so humble a
manner, that Totaro's heart was touched. "Come with me," he said. "There
is in my garden a large and deep pond where you may live as long as you
wish; and I will give you plenty to eat."
The _Samebito_ followed Totaro home, and appeared to be much pleased
with the pond.
Thereafter, for nearly half a year, this strange guest dwelt in the
pond, and was every day supplied by Totaro with such food as
sea-creatures like.
referred to, not as a monster, but as a sympathetic Person of
Now, in the seventh month of the same year, there was a female
pilgrimage (_nyonin-mode_) to the great Buddhist temple called Miidera,
in the neighboring town of Otsu; and Totaro went to Otsu to attend the
festival. Among the multitude of women and young girls there assembled,
he observed a person of extraordinary beauty. She seemed about sixteen
years old; her face was fair and pure as snow; and the loveliness of
her lips assured the beholder that their every utterance would sound "as
sweet as the voice of a nightingale singing upon a plum-tree." Totaro
fell in love with her at sight. When she left the temple he followed her
at a respectful distance, and discovered that she and her mother were
staying for a few days at a certain house in the neighboring village of
Seta. By questioning some of the village folk, he was able also to learn
that her name was Tamana; that she was unmarried; and that her family
appeared to be unwilling that she should marry a man of ordinary
rank,--for they demanded as a betrothal-gift a casket containing ten
meanings; and as here used it is quite as indefinite as our
own terms "jewel," "gem," or "precious stone." Indeed, it
is more indefinite, for it signifies also a bead of coral,
a ball of crystal, a polished stone attached to a hairpin,
etc., etc. Later on, however, I venture to render it by
"ruby,"--for reasons which need no explanation.
Totaro returned home very much dismayed by this information. The more
that he thought about the strange betrothal-gift demanded by the girl's
parents, the more he felt that he could never expect to obtain her for
his wife. Even supposing that there were as many as ten thousand jewels
in the whole country, only a great prince could hope to procure them.
But not even for a single hour could Totaro banish from his mind the
memory of that beautiful being. It haunted him so that he could neither
eat nor sleep; and it seemed to become more and more vivid as the days
went by. And at last he became ill,--so ill that he could not lift his
head from the pillow. Then he sent for a doctor.
The doctor, after having made a careful examination, uttered an
exclamation of surprise. "Almost any kind of sickness," he said, "can be
cured by proper medical treatment, except the sickness of love. Your
ailment is evidently love-sickness. There is no cure for it. In ancient
times Roya-O Hakuyo died of that sickness; and you must prepare yourself
to die as he died." So saying, the doctor went away, without even giving
any medicine to Totaro.
About this time the Shark-Man that was living in the garden-pond heard
of his master's sickness, and came into the house to wait upon Totaro.
And he tended him with the utmost affection both by day and by night.
But he did not know either the cause or the serious nature of the
sickness until nearly a week later, when Totaro, thinking himself about
to die, uttered these words of farewell:--
"I suppose that I have had the pleasure of caring for you thus long,
because of some relation that grew up between us in a former state of
existence. But now I am very sick indeed, and every day my sickness
becomes worse; and my life is like the morning dew which passes away
before the setting of the sun. For your sake, therefore, I am troubled
in mind. Your existence has depended upon my care; and I fear that there
will be no one to care for you and to feed you when I am dead.... My
poor friend!... Alas! our hopes and our wishes are always disappointed
in this unhappy world!"
No sooner had Totaro spoken these words than the Samebito uttered a
strange wild cry of pain, and began to weep bitterly. And as he wept,
great tears of blood streamed from his green eyes and rolled down his
black cheeks and dripped upon the floor. And, falling, they were blood;
but, having fallen, they became hard and bright and beautiful,--became
jewels of inestimable price, rubies splendid as crimson fire. For when
men of the sea weep, their tears become precious stones.
Then Totaro, beholding this marvel, was so amazed and overjoyed that his
strength returned to him. He sprang from his bed, and began to pick up
and to count the tears of the Shark-Man, crying out the while: "My
sickness is cured! I shall live! I shall live!"
Therewith, the Shark-Man, greatly astonished, ceased to weep, and asked
Totaro to explain this wonderful cure; and Totaro told him about the
young person seen at Miidera, and about the extraordinary marriage-gift
demanded by her family. "As I felt sure," added Totaro, "that I should
never be able to get ten thousand jewels, I supposed that my suit would
be hopeless. Then I became very unhappy, and at last fell sick. But now,
because of your generous weeping, I have many precious stones; and I
think that I shall be able to marry that girl. Only--there are not yet
quite enough stones; and I beg that you will be good enough to weep a
little more, so as to make up the full number required."
But at this request the Samebito shook his head, and answered in a tone
of surprise and of reproach:--
"Do you think that I am like a harlot,--able to weep whenever I wish?
Oh, no! Harlots shed tears in order to deceive men; but creatures of the
sea cannot weep without feeling real sorrow. I wept for you because of
the true grief that I felt in my heart at the thought that you were
going to die. But now I cannot weep for you, because you have told me
that your sickness is cured."
"Then what am I to do?" plaintively asked Totaro. "Unless I can get ten
thousand jewels, I cannot marry the girl!"
The Samebito remained for a little while silent, as if thinking. Then he
said:--
"Listen! To-day I cannot possibly weep any more. But to-morrow let us go
together to the Long Bridge of Seta, taking with us some wine and some
fish. We can rest for a time on the bridge; and while we are drinking
the wine and eating the fish, I shall gaze in the direction of the
Dragon-Palace, and try, by thinking of the happy days that I spent
there, to make myself feel homesick--so that I can weep."
Totaro joyfully assented.
Next morning the two, taking plenty of wine and fish with them, went to
the Seta bridge, and rested there, and feasted. After having drunk a
great deal of wine, the Samebito began to gaze in the direction of the
Dragon-Kingdom, and to think about the past. And gradually, under the
softening influence of the wine, the memory of happier days filled his
heart with sorrow, and the pain of homesickness came upon him, so that
he could weep profusely. And the great red tears that he shed fell upon
the bridge in a shower of rubies; and Totaro gathered them as they fell,
and put them into a casket, and counted them until he had counted the
full number of ten thousand. Then he uttered a shout of joy.
Almost in the same moment, from far away over the lake, a delightful
sound of music was heard; and there appeared in the offing, slowly
rising from the waters, like some fabric of cloud, a palace of the color
of the setting sun.
At once the Samebito sprang upon the parapet of the bridge, and looked,
and laughed for joy. Then, turning to Totaro, he said:--
"There must have been a general amnesty proclaimed in the Dragon-Realm;
the Kings are calling me. So now I must bid you farewell. I am happy to
have had one chance of befriending you in return for your goodness to
me."
With these words he leaped from the bridge; and no man ever saw him
again. But Totaro presented the casket of red jewels to the parents of
Tamana, and so obtained her in marriage.
... Life ere long
Came on me in the public ways, and bent
Eyes deeper than of old: Death met I too,
And saw the dawn glow through.
Semi
Koe ni mina
Naki-shimote ya--
Semi no kara!
--_Japanese Love-Song_
The voice having been all consumed by crying, there remains only
the shell of the _semi!_
A CELEBRATED Chinese scholar, known in Japanese literature as Riku-Un,
wrote the following quaint account of the Five Virtues of the Cicada:--
Japanese _semi_ are believed to be characters which
are names of souls.
"II.--It eats nothing belonging to earth, and drinks only dew.
This proves its cleanliness, purity, propriety.
"III.--It always appears at a certain fixed time. This proves
its fidelity, sincerity, truthfulness.
"IV.--It will not accept wheat or rice. This proves its probity,
uprightness, honesty.
"V.--It does not make for itself any nest to live in. This
proves its frugality, thrift, economy."
We might compare this with the beautiful address of Anacreon to the
cicada, written twenty-four hundred years ago: on more than one point
the Greek poet and the Chinese sage are in perfect accord:--
"_We deem thee happy, O Cicada, because, having drunk, like a
king, only a little dew, thou dost chirrup on the tops of trees.
For all things whatsoever that thou seest in the fields are
thine, and whatsoever the seasons bring forth. Yet art thou
the friend of the tillers of the land,--from no one harmfully
taking aught. By mortals thou art held in honor as the pleasant
harbinger of summer; and the Muses love thee. Phoebus himself
loves thee, and has given thee a shrill song. And old age does
not consume thee. O thou gifted one,--earth-born, song-loving,
free from pain, having flesh without blood,--thou art nearly
anthology, I have depended upon Burges'
translation.
And we must certainly go back to the old Greek literature in order to
find a poetry comparable to that of the Japanese on the subject of
musical insects. Perhaps of Greek verses on the cricket, the most
beautiful are the lines of Meleager: "_O cricket, the soother of slumber
... weaving the thread of a voice that causes love to wander away!_" ...
There are Japanese poems scarcely less delicate in sentiment on the
chirruping of night-crickets; and Meleager's promise to reward the
little singer with gifts of fresh leek, and with "drops of dew cut up
small," sounds strangely Japanese. Then the poem attributed to Anyte,
about the little girl Myro making a tomb for her pet cicada and
cricket, and weeping because Hades, "hard to be persuaded," had taken
her playthings away, represents an experience familiar to Japanese
child-life. I suppose that little Myro--(how freshly her tears still
glisten, after seven and twenty centuries!)--prepared that "common tomb"
for her pets much as the little maid of Nippon would do to-day, putting
a small stone on top to serve for a monument. But the wiser Japanese
Myro would repeat over the grave a certain Buddhist prayer.
It is especially in their poems upon the cicada that we find the old
Greeks confessing their love of insect-melody: witness the lines in the
Anthology about the tettix caught in a spider's snare, and "making
lament in the thin fetters" until freed by the poet;--and the verses by
Leonidas of Tarentum picturing the "unpaid minstrel to wayfaring men"
as "sitting upon lofty trees, warmed with the great heat of summer,
sipping the dew that is like woman's milk;"--and the dainty fragment of
Meleager, beginning: "_Thou vocal tettix, drunk with drops of dew,
sitting with thy serrated limbs upon the tops of petals, thou givest
out the melody of the lyre from thy dusky skin_." ... Or take the
charming address of Evenus to a nightingale:--
"_Thou Attic maiden, honey-fed, hast chirping seized a chirping
cicada, and bearest it to thy unfledged young,--thou, a twitterer,
the twitterer,--thou, the winged, the well-winged,--thou, a
stranger, the stranger,--thou, a summer-child, the summer-child!
Wilt thou not quickly cast it from thee? For it is not right, it
is not just, that those engaged in song should perish by the
mouths of those engaged in song._"
On the other hand, we find Japanese poets much more inclined to praise
the voices of night-crickets than those of semi. There are countless
poems about semi, but very few which commend their singing. Of course
the semi are very different from the cicadae known to the Greeks. Some
varieties are truly musical; but the majority are astonishingly
noisy,--so noisy that their stridulation is considered one of the great
afflictions of summer. Therefore it were vain to seek among the myriads
of Japanese verses on semi for anything comparable to the lines of
Evenus above quoted; indeed, the only Japanese poem that I could find on
the subject of a cicada caught by a bird, was the following:--
Ana kanashi!
Tobi ni toraruru
Semi no koe.
Ah! how piteous the cry of the semi seized by the kite!
Or "caught by a boy" the poet might equally well have observed,--this
being a much more frequent cause of the pitiful cry. The lament of
Nicias for the tettix would serve as the elegy of many a semi:--
"_No more shall I delight myself by sending out a sound from my
quick-moving wings, because I have fallen into the savage hand
of a boy, who seized me unexpectedly, as I was sitting under the
green leaves._"
Here I may remark that Japanese children usually capture semi by means
of a long slender bamboo tipped with bird-lime (_mochi_). The sound made
by some kinds of semi when caught is really pitiful,--quite as pitiful
as the twitter of a terrified bird. One finds it difficult to persuade
oneself that the noise is not a _voice_ of anguish, in the human sense
of the word "voice," but the production of a specialized exterior
membrane. Recently, on hearing a captured semi thus scream, I became
convinced in quite a new way that the stridulatory apparatus of certain
insects must not be thought of as a kind of musical instrument, but
as an organ of speech, and that its utterances are as intimately
associated with simple forms of emotion, as are the notes of a
bird,--the extraordinary difference being that the insect has its vocal
chords _outside_. But the insect-world is altogether a world of goblins
and fairies: creatures with organs of which we cannot discover the use,
and senses of which we cannot imagine the nature;--creatures with
myriads of eyes, or with eyes in their backs, or with eyes moving about
at the ends of trunks and horns;--creatures with ears in their legs and
bellies, or with brains in their waists! If some of them happen to have
voices outside of their bodies instead of inside, the fact ought not to
surprise anybody.
I have not yet succeeded in finding any Japanese verses alluding to the
stridulatory apparatus of semi,--though I think it probable that such
verses exist. Certainly the Japanese have been for centuries familiar
with the peculiarities of their own singing insects. But I should not
now presume to say that their poets are incorrect in speaking of the
"voices" of crickets and of cicadae. The old Greek poets who actually
describe insects as producing music with their wings and feet,
nevertheless speak of the "voices," the "songs," and the "chirruping" of
such creatures,--just as the Japanese poets do. For example, Meleager
thus addresses the cricket:
"_O thou that art with shrill wings the self-formed imitation of
the lyre, chirrup me something pleasant while beating your vocal
wings with your feet!_ ..."
BEFORE speaking further of the poetical literature of semi, I must
attempt a few remarks about the semi themselves. But the reader need
not expect anything entomological. Excepting, perhaps, the butterflies,
the insects of Japan are still little known to men of science; and all
that I can say about semi has been learned from inquiry, from personal
observation, and from old Japanese books of an interesting but totally
unscientific kind. Not only do the authors contradict each other as to
the names and characteristics of the best-known semi; they attach the
word semi to names of insects which are not cicadae.
The following enumeration of semi is certainly incomplete; but I believe
that it includes the better-known varieties and the best melodists. I
must ask the reader, however, to bear in mind that the time of the
appearance of certain semi differs in different parts of Japan; that
the same kind of semi may be called by different names in different
provinces; and that these notes have been written in Tokyo.
VARIOUS small semi appear in the spring. But the first of the big semi
to make itself heard is the _haru-zemi_ ("spring-semi"), also called
_uma-zemi_ ("horse-semi"), _kuma-zemi_ ("bear-semi"), and other names.
It makes a shrill wheezing sound,--_ji-i-i-i-i-iiiiiiii_,--beginning
low, and gradually rising to a pitch of painful intensity. No other
cicada is so noisy as the _haru-zemi;_ but the life of the creature
appears to end with the season. Probably this is the semi referred to in
an old Japanese poem:--
Hatsu-semi ya!
"Kore wa atsui" to
Iu hi yori.
The day after the first day on which we exclaim, "Oh, how hot
it is!" the first semi begins to cry.
"_Shinne-Shinne_,"
THE _shinne-shinne_--also called _yama-zemi_, or "mountain-semi";
_kuma-zemi_, or "bear-semi"; and _o-semi_, or "great semi"--begins to
sing as early as May. It is a very large insect. The upper part of the
body is almost black, and the belly a silvery-white; the head has
curious red markings. The name _shinne-shinne_ is derived from the note
of the creature, which resembles a quick continual repetition of the
syllables _shinne_. About Kyoto this semi is common: it is rarely heard
in Tokyo.
utterance is much more complex than the Japanese onomatope implies; I
should liken it to the noise of a sewing-machine in full operation.
There is a double sound: you hear not only the succession of sharp
metallic clickings, but also, below these, a slower series of dull
clanking tones. The stridulatory organs are light green, looking almost
THE _aburazemi_, or "oil-semi," makes its appearance early in the
summer. I am told that it owes its name to the fact that its
shrilling resembles the sound of oil or grease frying in a pan. Some
writers say that the shrilling resembles the sound of the syllables
_gacharin-gacharin_; but others compare it to the noise of water
boiling. The _aburazemi_ begins to chant about sunrise; then a great
soft hissing seems to ascend from all the trees. At such an hour, when
the foliage of woods and gardens still sparkles with dew, might have
been composed the following verse,--the only one in my collection
relating to the _aburazemi_:--
Ano koe de
Tsuyu ga inochi ka?--
Aburazemi!
Speaking with that voice, has the dew taken life?--Only the
_aburazemi_!
THE _mugi-kari-zemi_, or "barley-harvest semi," also called
_goshiki-zemi_, or "five-colored semi," appears early in the summer. It
makes two distinct sounds in different keys, resembling the syllables
_shi-in, shin--chi-i, chi-i_.
THIS insect, whose name signifies "day-darkening," is the most
remarkable of all the Japanese cicadae. It is not the finest singer
among them; but even as a melodist it ranks second only to the
_tsuku-tsuku-boshi_. It is the special minstrel of twilight,
singing only at dawn and sunset; whereas most of the other semi
make their music only in the full blaze of day, pausing even when
rain-clouds obscure the sun. In Tokyo the _higurashi_ usually
appears about the end of June, or the beginning of July. Its wonderful
cry,--_kana-kana-kana-kana-kana_,--beginning always in a very high
clear key, and slowly descending, is almost exactly like the sound of
a good hand-bell, very quickly rung. It is not a clashing sound, as of
violent ringing; it is quick, steady, and of surprising sonority. I
believe that a single _higurashi_ can be plainly heard a quarter of a
mile away; yet, as the old Japanese poet Yayu observed, "no matter
how many _higurashi_ be singing together, we never find them noisy."
Though powerful and penetrating as a resonance of metal, the
_higurashi's_ call is musical even to the degree of sweetness; and
there is a peculiar melancholy in it that accords with the hour of
gloaming. But the most astonishing fact in regard to the cry of the
_higurashi_ is the individual quality characterizing the note of each
insect. No two _higurashi_ sing precisely in the same tone. If you
hear a dozen of them singing at once, you will find that the timbre of
each voice is recognizably different from every other. Certain notes
ring like silver, others vibrate like bronze; and, besides varieties
of timbre suggesting bells of various weight and composition, there
are even differences in tone, that suggest different _forms_ of bell.
I have already said that the name _higurashi_ means "day-darkening,"--in
the sense of twilight, gloaming, dusk; and there are many Japanese
verses containing plays on the word,--the poets affecting to believe, as
in the following example, that the crying of the insect hastens the
coming of darkness:--
Higurashi ya!
Suteteoitemo
Kururu hi wo.
O Higurashi!--even if you let it alone, day darkens fast
enough!
This, intended to express a melancholy mood, may seem to the Western
reader far-fetched. But another little poem--referring to the effect of
the sound upon the conscience of an idler--will be appreciated by any
one accustomed to hear the _higurashi_. I may observe, in this
connection, that the first clear evening cry of the insect is quite as
startling as the sudden ringing of a bell:--
Higurashi ya!
Kyo no ketai wo
Omou-toki.
Already, O Higurashi, your call announces the evening!
Alas, for the passing day, with its duties left undone!
THE _minmin-zemi_ begins to sing in the Period of Greatest Heat. It is
called "_min-min_" because its note is thought to resemble the syllable
"_min_" repeated over and over again,--slowly at first, and very loudly;
then more and more quickly and softly, till the utterance dies away in a
sort of buzz: "_min--min--min-min-min-minminmin-dzzzzzzz_." The sound is
plaintive, and not unpleasing. It is often compared to the sound of the
voice of a priest chanting the _sutras_.
(_Cosmopsaltria Opalifera?_)
ON the day immediately following the Festival of the Dead, by the old
Western calendar in regard to nature-changes and manifestations),
begins to sing the _tsuku-tsuku-boshi_. This creature may be said
to sing like a bird. It is also called _kutsu-kutsu-boshi_,
_choko-choko-uisu_, _tsuku-tsuku-hoshi_, _tsuku-tsuku-oishi_,--all
onomatopoetic appellations. The sounds of its song have been imitated
in different ways by various writers. In Izumo the common version is,--
Tsuku-tsuku-uisu,
Tsuku-tsuku-uisu,
Tsuku-tsuku-uisu:--
Ui-osu
Ui-osu
Ui-osu
Ui-os-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-su.
Another version runs,--
Tsuku-tsuku-uisu,
Tsuku-tsuku-uisu,
Tsuku-tsuku-uisu:--
Chi-i yara!
Chi-i yara!
Chi-i yara!
Chi-i, chi, chi, chi, chi, chiii.
But some say that the sound is _Tsukushi-koishi_. There is a legend
that in old times a man of Tsukushi (the ancient name of Kyushu)
fell sick and died while far away from home, and that the
ghost of him became an autumn cicada, which cries unceasingly,
_Tsukushi-koishi!--Tsukushi-koishi!_ ("I long for Tsukushi!--I want
to see Tsukushi!")
It is a curious fact that the earlier semi have the harshest and
simplest notes. The musical semi do not appear until summer; and the
_tsuku-tsuku-boshi_, having the most complex and melodious utterance of
all, is one of the latest to mature.
THE _tsurigane-semi_ is an autumn cicada. The word _tsurigane_ means a
suspended bell,--especially the big bell of a Buddhist temple. I am
somewhat puzzled by the name; for the insect's music really suggests
the tones of a Japanese harp, or _koto_--as good authorities declare.
Perhaps the appellation refers not to the boom of the bell, but to those
deep, sweet hummings which follow after the peal, wave upon wave.
JAPANESE poems on semi are usually very brief; and my collection chiefly
consists of _hokku_,--compositions of seventeen syllables. Most of these
_hokku_ relate to the sound made by the semi,--or, rather, to the
sensation which the sound produced within the poet's mind. The names
attached to the following examples are nearly all names of old-time
poets,--not the real names, of course, but the _go_, or literary names
by which artists and men of letters are usually known.
Yokoi Yayu, a Japanese poet of the eighteenth century, celebrated as a
composer of _hokku_, has left us this naive record of the feelings with
which he heard the chirruping of cicadae in summer and in autumn:--
"In the sultry period, feeling oppressed by the greatness of the
heat, I made this verse:--
"Semi atsushi
Matsu kirabaya to
Omou-made.
"But the days passed quickly; and later, when I heard the crying
of the semi grow fainter and fainter in the time of the autumn
winds, I began to feel compassion for them, and I made this
second verse:--
"Shini-nokore
Hitotsu bakari wa
Aki no semi."
But a single one
Lovers of Pierre Loti (the world's greatest prose-writer) may remember
in _Madame Chrysantheme_ a delightful passage about a Japanese
house,--describing the old dry woodwork as impregnated with sonority by
poem containing a fancy not altogether dissimilar:--
Matsu no ki ni
Shimikomu gotoshi
Semi no koe.
Into the wood of the pine-tree
Seems to soak
The voice of the semi.
interior, he observes: "Il manque a ce logis dessine son
air frele et sa sonorite de violon sec. Dans les traits de
crayon qui representent les boiseries, il n'y a pas la
precision minutieuse avec laquelle elles sont ouvragees, ni
leur antiquite extreme, ni leur proprete parfaite, _ni les
vibrations de cigales qu' elles semblent avoir emmagasinees
pendant des centaines d'etes dans leurs fibres
dessechees_."
A very large number of Japanese poems about semi describe the noise of
the creatures as an affliction. To fully sympathize with the complaints
of the poets, one must have heard certain varieties of Japanese cicadae
in full midsummer chorus; but even by readers without experience of the
clamor, the following verses will probably be found suggestive:--
Ware hitori
Atsui yo nari,--
Semi no koe!
Meseems that only I,--I alone among mortals,--
Ever suffered such heat!--oh, the noise of the semi!
Ushiro kara
Tsukamu yo nari,--
Semi no koe.
Oh, the noise of the semi!--a pain of invisible seizure,--
Clutched in an enemy's grasp,--caught by the hair from behind!
Yama no Kami no
Mimi no yamai ka?--
Semi no koe!
What ails the divinity's ears?--how can the God of the Mountain
Suffer such noise to exist?--oh, the tumult of semi!
Soko no nai
Atsusa ya kumo ni
Semi no koe!
Fathomless deepens the heat: the ceaseless shrilling of semi
Mounts, like a hissing of fire, up to the motionless clouds.
Mizu karete,
Semi wo fudan-no
Taki no koe.
Water never a drop: the chorus of semi, incessant,
Mocks the tumultuous hiss,--the rush and foaming of rapids.
Kageroishi
Kumo mata satte,
Semi no koe.
Gone, the shadowing clouds!--again the shrilling of semi
Rises and slowly swells,--ever increasing the heat!
Daita ki wa,
Ha mo ugokasazu,--
Semi no koe!
Somewhere fast to the bark he clung; but I cannot see him:
He stirs not even a leaf--oh! the noise of that semi!
Tonari kara
Kono ki nikumu ya!
Semi no koe.
All because of the Semi that sit and shrill on its branches--
Oh! how this tree of mine is hated now by my neighbor!
This reminds one of Yayu. We find another poet compassionating a tree
frequented by semi:--
Kaze wa mina
Semi ni suwarete,
Hito-ki kana!
Alas! poor solitary tree!--pitiful now your lot,--every breath
of air having been sucked up by the semi!
Sometimes the noise of the semi is described as a moving force:--
Semi no koe
Ki-gi ni ugoite,
Kaze mo nashi!
Every tree in the wood quivers with clamor of semi:
Motion only of noise--never a breath of wind!
Take ni kite,
Yuki yori omoshi
Semi no koe.
More heavy than winter-snow the voices of perching semi:
inspiration in the spectacle of bamboos bending
under the weight of snow clinging to their tops.
Morogoe ni
Yama ya ugokasu,
Ki-gi no semi.
All shrilling together, the multitudinous semi
Make, with their ceaseless clamor, even the mountain move.
Kusunoki mo
Ugoku yo nari,
Semi no koe.
Even the camphor-tree seems to quake with the clamor of semi!
Sometimes the sound is compared to the noise of boiling water:--
Hizakari wa
Nietatsu semi no
Hayashi kana!
In the hour of heaviest heat, how simmers the forest with semi!
Niete iru
Mizu bakari nari--
Semi no koe.
Simmers all the air with sibilation of semi,
Ceaseless, wearying sense,--a sound of perpetual boiling.
Other poets complain especially of the multitude of the noise-makers and
the ubiquity of the noise:--
Aritake no
Ki ni hibiki-keri
Semi no koe.
How many soever the trees, in each rings the voice of the semi.
Matsubara wo
Ichi ri wa kitari,
Semi no koe.
Alone I walked for miles into the wood of pine-trees:
Always the one same semi shrilled its call in my ears.
Occasionally the subject is treated with comic exaggeration:--
Naite iru
Ki yori mo futoshi
Semi no koe.
which it sings.
Sugi takashi
Saredomo semi no
Amaru koe!
High though the cedar be, the voice of the semi is incomparably
higher!
Koe nagaki
Semi wa mijikaki
Inochi kana!
How long, alas! the voice and how short the life of the semi!
Some poets celebrate the negative form of pleasure following upon the
cessation of the sound:--
Semi ni dete,
Hotaru ni modoru,--
Suzumi kana!
When the semi cease their noise, and the fireflies come
out--oh! how refreshing the hour!
Semi no tatsu,
Ato suzushisa yo!
Matsu no koe.
When the semi cease their storm, oh, how refreshing the
stillness!
Gratefully then resounds the musical speech of the pines.
about the _matsu no koe_, in which the onomatope "zazanza" very well
represents the deep humming of the wind in the pine-needles:--
Zazanza!
Hama-matsu no oto wa,--
Zazanza,
Zazanza!
Zazanza!
The sound of the pines of the shore,--
Zazanza!