Transcriber's Notes: Some typographical and punctuation errors have been
corrected. A complete list follows the text. Words italicized in the
original are surrounded by _underscores_. Words in bold in the original
are surrounded by =equal signs=. Characters superscripted in the original
are inclosed in {} brackets. More Transcriber's Notes follow the text.
Select English Classics
This is the first volume of a series of SELECT ENGLISH CLASSICS which
the publishers have in course of preparation. The series will include an
extensive variety of selections chosen from the different departments of
English literature, and arranged and annotated for the use of classes in
schools. It will embrace, among other things, representative specimens
from all the best English writers, whether of poetry or of prose;
selections from English dramatic literature, especially of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; choice extracts from the writings
of the great essayists; selections from famous English allegories; a
volume of elegies and elegiacal poetry; studies of English prose
fiction, with illustrative specimens, etc. Each volume will contain
copious notes, critical, explanatory, and biographical, besides the
necessary vocabularies, glossaries, and indexes; and the series when
complete will present a varied and comprehensive view of all that is
best in English literature. For supplementary reading, as well as for
systematic class instruction, the books will possess many peculiarly
valuable as well as novel features; while their attractive appearance,
combined with the sterling quality of their contents, will commend them
for general reading and make them desirable acquisitions for every
library.
There is but one study more interesting than the history of literature,
and that is the study of literature itself. That the former should often
be mistaken for the latter is scarcely to be wondered at when we
consider the intimate and almost indivisible relationship existing
between them. Yet, in truth, they are as capable of separate
consideration as are music and the history of music.
Any careful investigation of the history of English poetry would
naturally begin at a point of time some six or seven hundred years
earlier than that of Chaucer. From such investigation we should learn
that even as early as the ninth century--perhaps, indeed, the
eighth--there were in England some composers of verse in the Anglo-Saxon
tongue; that the songs of these poets were chiefly of religion or of
war, and that being written in a language very different from our modern
English they can scarcely be considered as belonging properly to our
literature; that among them, however, is a noble poem, "Beowulf," the
oldest epic of any modern people, which was probably sung or recited by
pagan minstrels long before it was written down in permanent form; that,
after the conquest of England by the Normans, the early language of the
English people underwent a long and tedious process of transition,--a
blending, in a certain sense, with the Latinized and more polished
tongue of their conquerors,--and that the result was the language which
we now call English and are proud to claim as our own; that it was about
three hundred years after the Norman Conquest, namely, in 1362, that
this new tongue was officially recognized and authorized to be used in
the courts at law throughout the land; and that about the same time
Geoffrey Chaucer composed and wrote his first poems. We should learn,
moreover, that, during the transition period mentioned above, there were
many attempts at writing poetry, resulting in the production of tedious
metrical romances (chiefly translated from the French) and interminable
rhyming chronicles, pleasing, of course, to the people of that time, but
wholly devoid of poetic excellence and unspeakably dull to modern
readers; that these poems, so called, were little better than rhymed
doggerels, written in couplets of eight-syllabled lines and having for
their subjects the miraculous deeds of saints and heroes and the
occurrence of supernatural or impossible phenomena; that the composers
of these metrical romances and chronicles, although giving free rein to
the imagination, were utterly destitute of poetic fancy and hence
produced no true poetry; that, nevertheless, some writer was now and
then inspired by a flash of real poetic fire, producing a few lines of
remarkable freshness and beauty,--little lyrics shining forth like gems
in the great mass of verbiage and rubbish and foretelling the glorious
possibilities which were to be realized in the future.
Continuing this most interesting study, we should learn that just at the
time that Chaucer was beginning the composition of his immortal works,
there appeared an allegorical poem of considerable length, so earnest in
tone, so richly imaginative, so full of picturesque descriptions, that
it seemed rather a fulfilment than a prophecy; that this poem--called
"The Vision of William concerning Piers Ploughman," and written by an
obscure monk whose name was probably William Langland--was the greatest
poem and the most popular that had ever been written in England, and yet
that it failed in many ways of being true English poetry: its metre was
irregular, and its rhythm was imperfect; its verses instead of rhyming
were constructed in accordance with certain rules of alliteration; its
subjects, while interesting, no doubt, to those for whom it was written,
were not such as bring into play the highest powers of the imagination
or incite the poetic fancy to its noblest flights. Then we should learn
that while the ink from good Langland's pen was yet scarcely dry after
his third revision of "Piers Ploughman," Geoffrey Chaucer came forward
with his sweet imaginings bodied in immortal verse, his tuneful numbers,
his "well of English undefiled,"--and English poetry, which now for more
than five centuries has been the chief glory of our literature, had its
true beginning.
Pursuing the study on lines which would now be more distinctly marked,
we should observe that Chaucer's best poetry, as well as that of the
poets who followed him in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, was
distinguished by its truthfulness to nature, by its expression in hearty
and harmonious words of the finer emotions of the soul, and by the
freedom and elasticity of its versification. We should learn that in the
seventeenth century this style of poetry--sometimes called the
romantic--was succeeded by another and very different fashion in poetic
composition, introduced into England in imitation of continental and
classical models: that this new style of versification--ignoring nature
and making everything subservient to art--was purely artificial,
characterized by "an oratorical pomp, a classical correctness, a
theatrical dressing, abundance of moralizing"; and that, with Waller for
its sponsor and Dryden and Pope for its high priests, it remained for a
century and a half the favorite of the literary world, the model of
poetic diction, the standard of poetic taste. We should learn that,
towards the end of the eighteenth century, certain writers began to
perceive that although attention to artistic rules in composition may be
necessary to the best poetry, yet natural feeling, a cultivated
imagination, and a fancy unrestrained by merely arbitrary limitations
are even more indispensable; that these writers, rebelling against the
established order of things, taught that there are elements of true
poetry in the popular ballads of earlier times, that even the wearisome
metrical romances of the Middle Ages are rich in suggestiveness and in
materials for a nobler poetry, and that, instead of going to the
classics and to society for subjects and models, the poet may find them
in nature, in the life which is about him, and in a thousand sources
never before suspected. Finally, we should learn that, at the very time
when great revolutions in politics and philosophy were being
inaugurated, a new spirit thus began to manifest itself in our
literature,--a spirit of revolt against artificial restrictions and
traditional methods,--which produced a glorious revival in English
poetic composition and ushered in a third great school of poetry,
distinguished for its breadth and freedom, as that which it superseded
A study of the development of English poetry such as we have outlined
above would involve a knowledge of the history of the English people and
of the various circumstances and events which from time to time
influenced our language and literature. It would also embrace many other
topics, biographical, philological, rhetorical, and speculative, which
have only a secondary relationship to the central idea of poetry. In
fact, it would be a study not of poetry, but about poetry,--of the
circumstances which suggested it, of the men who produced it, and of the
origin of the word-forms and methods of versification which distinguish
it. Such a study, altogether interesting and eminently profitable though
it be, should not be undertaken by any student until he has acquired an
extensive personal acquaintance with poetry itself. We may enjoy the
beautiful creations of Tennyson, of Shelley, of Burns, even of Chaucer,
without knowing one word of the history of poetry, without so much as
knowing the names of the writers or the circumstances under which they
wrote. But, on the other hand, to him who knows nothing of the
masterpieces of our literature, save at second hand, the history of
English letters must of necessity be dull, uninteresting, and often
unintelligible. While to him who has prepared himself for its study by
fitting himself for an appreciation of these noble creations and
becoming thoroughly imbued with their spirit, what a field of delightful
study does it offer!
The object of the present compilation is to aid in this preparatory
work,--that is, to offer a plan for promoting the study OF poetry before
the broader but less important study ABOUT poetry is undertaken. To this
end we present for the student's consideration a few representative
poems written at different times and by men of widely different tastes
and talents during the six centuries which may be said to have elapsed
since the formation of the modern English tongue. Our chief aim is to
lead to such a study of these selections as shall help the reader to
perceive and appreciate their true poetic qualities and enter into full
sympathy with the thoughts and feelings which their writers intended to
express. The first object to be sought in the study of these poems is
the perception of those characteristic excellences which have made them
universally admired and placed them among the classics of our language.
To accomplish this object rationally and successfully, it is best to
begin with those productions which are nearest to us in point of time
and which are more in harmony with our own thoughts, and therefore
easiest to understand and enjoy. An attempt to pursue these studies in
chronological order, beginning with the works of Chaucer and the older
poets, would oblige the student to encounter at the outset so many
purely mechanical difficulties that he would fail to discern the
spiritual qualities of truth, beauty, and goodness, which are the very
essence of all genuine poetry. He would very naturally acquire a
distaste for poetry long before he was able to understand it, and while
he might attain to some considerable knowledge of the history of
poetical literature, that literature itself would remain to him
practically a sealed book. Hence, in the study of this subject, as in
that of other branches, the true method is to present first that which
is the least difficult, to "proceed from the known to the unknown," to
begin with that which is near at hand and from it to proceed to the
consideration of things more remote. Not only are the most of Tennyson's
poems easily understood, but their beauty is readily apparent even to
the most superficial readers. By the time we have read and extracted all
the sweets from three or four of these, we shall be prepared to go a
step farther and undertake the study of Wordsworth's immortal
productions,--productions but little more difficult and but little less
poetic. Thus, step by step, we may review the six centuries of English
poetry which lie behind, and when at last we reach the time of Chaucer
we shall be able to take hold of his works with understanding and with
the zest which is begotten of true sympathy and appreciation. After the
book has been thus completed, it may be well to run through it again,
reversing the order of the lessons and this time considering the
subjects in strict chronological order. Our first study of the book will
have introduced us to English poetry, our second study of it will have
given us some insight into the history of its development.
It is well to remember, while pursuing this course, that a taste for
poetry is not acquired or fostered by an analysis of grammatical forms
or by any study of words merely as such. To analyze a puzzling sentence
or to trace the derivation of an interesting word to its roots sometimes
helps one to understand a difficult expression or to perceive in it a
meaning hitherto unsuspected; but to make the study of any selection
consist largely of exercises of this kind is to substitute grammar or
philology for literature. So, also, should it be borne in mind that
while it is often interesting and sometimes necessary to become
acquainted with certain details relative to the life of an author--the
date of his birth, the character of his education, the influences which
shaped his life and his work--yet such knowledge belongs to biography
and is in no sense literature. The study of authors should never be
substituted for the study of their works, and is usually profitable only
so far as it helps the student to understand the peculiarities which
distinguish those works and which are the result of certain personal
characteristics. And yet it is no uncommon thing to find students
acquainted with the minutest particulars in the lives of the great
writers, while of the masterpieces of thought and expression, which are
the glory of our literature, they betray a deplorable ignorance. Nor is
this the case with pupils at school alone. "For once that we take down a
Milton, and read a book of that 'voice,' as Wordsworth says, 'whose
sound is like the sea,' we take up fifty times a magazine with something
about Milton, or about Milton's grandmother, or a book stuffed with
curious facts about the houses in which he lived, and the juvenile
In the study of the selections contained in this volume, the following
method is recommended:--
manner as to bring out, if possible, his understanding of the meaning of
every passage.
of thought or expression which distinguish it as a poetical composition.
endeavor to understand each word or expression just as the poet intended
that it should be understood. The Notes appended to most of the
selections are intended rather to suggest the line of study in this
regard than to serve as exhaustive aids. The pupil should, so far as
possible, investigate for himself and make his own discoveries.
Questions concerning the derivation of words and the syntax of sentences
are to be discussed only so far as they will aid in the understanding of
some passage or of the piece as a whole.
life. What were the conditions under which he wrote this piece? What was
the character of his education and of the other influences which shaped
his life and distinguished his works? Learn what some of the leading
critics have said concerning his works as a poet.
as a work of literary art, and again point out its distinctive beauties
and characteristic excellences.
The extracts given at the beginning of each Century will serve to keep
in mind the leading peculiarities which distinguished the poetry of each
period; and the lists of poets and their works will be found valuable
for purposes of reference. Before beginning the study of the selections
both teacher and pupils should read this Introduction carefully.
The Lady of Shalott                              17
The Brook                                        25
The Lotus Eaters                                 28
Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of
Early Childhood                               37
The Two April Mornings                           49
The Solitary Reaper                              51
Christabel. Part I                               55
To a Skylark                                     67
Hymn of Pan                                      71
From Epipsychidion                               74
Ode to a Nightingale                             83
From The Eve of St. Agnes                        87
The Cotter's Saturday Night                      97
To a Mountain Daisy                             107
For a' that and a' that                         109
Boadicea                                        113
On the Receipt of my Mother's Picture           115
Epitaph on a Hare                               120
The Village Parson                              124
The Village Schoolmaster                        125
The Bard                                        129
From the Essay on Criticism                     141
Ode on St. Cecilia's Day                        147
Alexander's Feast                               159
The Fire of London                              169
Reason and Religion                             174
On the Morning of Christ's Nativity             177
Wordsworth's Sonnet to Milton                   196
To Phillis                                      197
The Mad Maid's Song                             199
A Thanksgiving to God                           200
Song: Go, lovely Rose                           203
Of English Verse                                204
On a Girdle                                     205
An Ode to Himself                               207
To Cynthia                                      209
To the Memory of William Shakespeare            210
Herrick's Ode for Ben Jonson                    214
Venus's Advice to Adonis on Hunting             217
A Morning Song for Imogen                       219
Sigh no more, Ladies                            220
Sunshine and Cloud (Sonnet xxxiii.)             220
The World's Way (Sonnet lxvi.)                  221
The Cave of Mammon                              223
Prothalamion; or, a Spousall Verse              235
A Love Song                                     247
The Courtier's Life                             248
From Virgil's Æneid                             249
Sonnet: Geraldine                               250
On the Death of Sir Thomas Wyatt                251
Waly, waly                                      253
Sir Patrick Spens                               255
The Bailiff's Daughter of Islington             259
Robin Hood and the Widow's three Sons           261
To Maystress Margaret Hussey                    269
Cardinal Wolsey                                 270
A Visit to London                               273
The Golden Age                                  275
The Garmond of Fair Ladies                      277
A May Morning                                   279
In Praise of Honour                             281
From the Prologue to the Canterbury Tales       287
The Nineteenth Century.
"_Now appeared the English romantic school, a sect of 'dissenters in
poetry,' who spoke out aloud, kept themselves close together, and
repelled settled minds by the audacity and novelty of their theories.
They had violently broken with tradition, and leaped over all classical
culture, to take their models from the Renaissance and the middle-age.
They sought, in the old national ballads and ancient poetry of foreign
lands, the fresh and primitive accent which had been wanting in
classical literature, and whose presence seemed to them to be a sign of
truth and beauty. They proposed to adapt to poetry the ordinary language
of conversation, such as is spoken in the middle and lower classes, and
to replace studied phrases and a lofty vocabulary by natural tones and
plebeian words. In place of the classic mould, they tried stanzas,
sonnets, ballads, blank verse, with the roughness and subdivisions of
the primitive poets. . . . Some had culled gigantic legends, piled up
dreams, ransacked the East, Greece, Arabia, the Middle Ages, and
overloaded the human imagination with hues and fancies from every clime.
Others had buried themselves in metaphysics and moral philosophy, had
mused indefatigably on the condition of man, and spent their lives on
the sublime and the monotonous. Others, making a medley of crime and
heroism, had conducted, through darkness and flashes of lightning, a
train of contorted and terrible figures, desperate with remorse,
relieved by their grandeur. Men wanted to rest after so many efforts and
so much success. On the going out of the imaginative, sentimental, and
Satanic school, Tennyson appeared exquisite. All the forms and ideas
which had pleased them were found in him, but purified, modulated, set
in a splendid style. He completed an age._"--TAINE.
_Poets of the Nineteenth Century._
=William Wordsworth= (1770-1850). See biographical note, page 52.
=Sir Walter Scott= (1771-1832). "The Lay of the Last Minstrel"; "The Lady
of the Lake"; "Marmion"; "The Lord of the Isles"; short poems.
=Samuel Taylor Coleridge= (1772-1834). See biographical note, page 65.
=Robert Southey= (1774-1843). "Thalaba"; "Roderick, the last of the
Goths"; "Joan of Arc"; "Madoc"; "The Curse of Kehama"; numerous short
poems.
=Charles Lamb= (1775-1834). Chiefly short poems.
=Walter Savage Landor= (1775-1864). "Gebir"; and other poems.
=Thomas Campbell= (1777-1844). "Gertrude of Wyoming"; "The Pleasures of
Hope"; short poems.
=Thomas Moore= (1779-1852). "Irish Melodies"; "Lalla Rookh"; "Rhymes on
the Road"; "The Loves of the Angels," etc.
=Leigh Hunt= (1784-1859). "Francesca Rimini"; "A Legend of Florence";
"Stories in Verse," etc.
=Bryan Waller Procter= ("Barry Cornwall") (1787-1874). "A Sicilian Story";
"English Songs," etc.
=Lord Byron= (George Gordon Noel) (1788-1824). "Childe Harold"; "The
Giaour"; "Bride of Abydos"; "The Corsair"; "Lara"; "Hebrew Melodies";
"Siege of Corinth"; "Parisina"; "Manfred"; "Don Juan," etc.
=Percy Bysshe Shelley= (1792-1822). See biographical note, page 81.
=John Keats= (1795-1821). See biographical note, page 93.
=Thomas Hood= (1799-1845). Numerous short poems, chiefly humorous.
=Lord Macaulay= (1800-1859). "Lays of Ancient Rome."
=Elizabeth Barrett Browning= (1809-1861). "Prometheus Bound"; "Casa Guidi
Windows"; "Sonnets from the Portuguese"; "Aurora Leigh"; "Poems before
Congress"; "Last Poems."
=Alfred Tennyson= (Lord Tennyson) (1809-). See biographical note, page 35.
=Richard Monckton Milnes= (Lord Houghton) (1809-1885). "Historical Poems";
"Poetry for the People"; "Poems of Many Years."
=Robert Browning= (1812-1889). "Christmas Eve and Easter Day"; "Men and
Women"; "The Ring and the Book"; "Balaustion's Adventure"; "Fifine at
the Fair"; "Aristophanes' Apology," etc.
=William Edmondstoune Aytoun= (1813-1865). "Lays of the Scottish
Cavaliers"; "Ballads of Scotland," etc.
=Arthur Hugh Clough= (1819-1861). "The Bothie"; "Ambarvalia," etc.
=Charles Kingsley= (1819-1875). "Andromeda"; many short poems.
=Matthew Arnold= (1822-1889). "The Strayed Reveller and other Poems";
"Balder."
=Adelaide Anne Procter= (1825-1864). "Legends and Lyrics"; "A Chaplet of
Verses."
=Robert Bulwer-Lytton= ("Owen Meredith") (1831-1892). "Lucile"; "Marah,"
etc.
Alfred Tennyson.
On either side the river lie
Long fields of barley and of rye,
That clothe the wold{1} and meet the sky:
And through the fields the road runs by
To many-towered Camelot{2};
And up and down the people go,
Gazing where the lilies blow
Round an island there below,
The island of Shalott.
Willows whiten, aspens quiver,
Little breezes dusk{3} and shiver
Through the wave that runs forever
By the island in the river
Flowing down to Camelot;
Four gray walls, and four gray towers,
Overlook a space of flowers,
And the silent isle imbowers
The Lady of Shalott.
By the margin, willow-veiled,
Slide the heavy barges, trailed{4}
By slow horses; and unhailed
The shallop flitteth silken-sailed,
Skimming down to Camelot:
But who hath seen her wave her hand?
Or at the casement seen her stand?
Or is she known in all the land,
The lady of Shalott?
Only reapers, reaping early
In among the bearded barley,
Hear a song that echoes cheerly
From the river winding clearly,
Down to towered Camelot:
And by the moon the reaper weary,
Piling sheaves in uplands airy,
Listening, whispers, "'Tis the fairy
Lady of Shalott."
There she weaves by night and day
A magic web{5} with colors gay.
She has heard a whisper say,
A curse is on her if she stay
To look down to Camelot.
She knows not what the curse may be,
And so she weaveth steadily,
And little other care hath she,
The Lady of Shalott.
And moving through a mirror clear
That hangs before her all the year,
Shadows of the world appear.
There she sees the highway near
Winding down to Camelot:
There the river-eddy whirls,
And there the surly village-churls,
And the red cloaks of market girls
Pass onward from Shalott.
Sometimes a troop of damsels glad,
An abbott on an ambling pad,{6}
Sometimes a curly shepherd-lad
Or long-haired page in crimson clad,
Goes by to towered Camelot;
And sometimes through the mirror blue,
The knights come riding two and two:
She hath no loyal knight and true,
The Lady of Shalott.
But in her web she still delights
To weave the mirrored magic sights,
For often through the silent nights
A funeral, with plumes and lights,
And music, went to Camelot;
Or, when the moon was overhead,
Came two young lovers lately wed.
"I am half-sick of shadows," said
The Lady of Shalott.{7}
A bow-shot from her bower-eaves,
He rode between the barley-sheaves,
The sun came dazzling through the leaves,
And flamed upon the brazen greaves
Of bold Sir Lancelot.
A red-cross{8} knight forever kneeled
To a lady in his shield
That sparkled on the yellow field,
Beside remote Shalott.
The gemmy bridle glittered free,
Like to some branch of stars we see
Hung in the golden Galaxy.{9}
The bridle-bells rang merrily
As he rode down to Camelot:
And from his blazoned baldric{10} slung
A mighty silver bugle hung,
And as he rode his armor rung,
Beside remote Shalott.
All in the blue unclouded weather
Thick-jewelled shone the saddle-leather,
The helmet and the helmet-feather
Burned like one burning flame together,
As he rode down to Camelot.
As often through the purple night,
Below the starry clusters bright,
Some bearded meteor,{11} trailing light,
Moves over still Shalott.
His broad clear brow in sunlight glowed;
On burnished hooves his war-horse trode;
From underneath his helmet flowed
His coal-black curls as on he rode,
As he rode down to Camelot.
From the bank and from the river
He flashed{12} into the crystal mirror,
"Tirra lirra," by the river{13}
Sang Sir Lancelot.
She left the web, she left the loom,
She made three paces through the room,
She saw the water-lily bloom,
She saw the helmet and the plume,
She looked down to Camelot.
Out flew the web and floated wide;
The mirror cracked from side to side;
"The curse is come upon me," cried
The Lady of Shalott.
In the stormy east-wind straining,
The pale yellow woods were waning,
The broad stream in his banks complaining,
Heavily the low sky raining
Over towered Camelot;
Down she came and found a boat
Beneath a willow left afloat,
And round about the prow she wrote,
_The Lady of Shalott_.
And down the river's dim expanse--
Like some bold seër in a trance,
Seeing all his own mischance--
With a glassy countenance
Did she look to Camelot.
And at the closing of the day
She loosed the chain, and down she lay;
The broad stream bore her far away,
The Lady of Shalott.
Lying, robed in snowy white
That loosely flew to left and right--
The leaves upon her falling light--
Through the noises of the night
She floated down to Camelot:
And as the boat-head wound along
The willowy hills and fields among,
They heard her singing her last song,
The Lady of Shalott.
Heard a carol, mournful, holy,
Chanted loudly, chanted lowly,
Till her blood was frozen slowly,
And her eyes were darkened wholly,
Turned to towered Camelot;
For ere she reached upon the tide
The first house by the water-side,
Singing in her song she died,
The Lady of Shalott.
Under tower and balcony,
By garden-wall and gallery,
A gleaming shape she floated by,
A corse between the houses high,
Silent into Camelot.
Out upon the wharfs they came,
Knight and burgher, lord and dame,
And round the prow they read her name,
_The Lady of Shalott_.
Who is this? and what is here?
And in the lighted palace near
Died the sound of royal cheer;
And they crossed themselves for fear,
All the knights at Camelot;
But Lancelot mused a little space;
He said, "She has a lovely face;
God in his mercy lend her grace,
The Lady of Shalott."
This poem was written in 1832. Considered as a picture, or as a series
of pictures, its beauty is unsurpassed. The story which is here so
briefly told is founded upon a touching legend connected with the
romance of King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table. Tennyson
afterwards (in 1859) expanded it into the _Idyll_ called "Elaine,"
wherein he followed more closely the original narrative as related by
Sir Thomas Malory.
Sir Lancelot was the strongest and bravest of the Knights of the Round
Table, and for him Elaine, "the fair maid of Astolat," conceived a
hopeless passion. "Her love was platonic and pure as that of a child,
but it was masterful in its strength." Having learned that Lancelot was
pledged to celibacy, she pined away and died. But before her death she
called her brother, and having dictated a letter which he was to write,
she spake thus:
"'While my body is whole, let this letter be put into my right hand, and
my hand bound fast with the letter until I be cold, and let me be put in
a fair bed with all my richest clothes that I have about me, and so let
my bed and all my rich clothes be laid with me in a chariot to the next
place whereas the Thames is, and there let me be put in a barge, and but
one man with me, such as ye trust to steer me thither, and that my barge
be covered with black samite over and over.' . . . So when she was dead,
the corpse and the bed and all was led the next way unto the Thames, and
there all were put in a barge on the Thames, and so the man steered the
barge to Westminster, and there he rowed a great while to and fro, or
to the waterside, and seeing the boat and the lily maid of Astolat, they
uplifted the hapless body of Elaine, and bore it to the hall.
"But Arthur spied the letter in her hand,
Stoopt, took, brake seal, and read it; this was all:
'Most noble Lord, Sir Lancelot of the Lake,
I, sometime called the maid of Astolat,
Come, for you left me taking no farewell,
Hither, to take my last farewell of you.
I loved you, and my love had no return,
And therefore my true love has been my death. . . .
Pray for my soul and yield me burial.
Pray for my soul thou too Sir Lancelot,
And so the maid was buried, "not as one unknown, nor meanly, but with
gorgeous obsequies, and mass and rolling music, like a queen. And the
story of her dolorous voyage was blazoned on her tomb in letters gold
and azure."
This word is more frequently used, however, to designate a forest or
thick wood.
seat of King Arthur's court, and visitors are still shown the remains of
what appear to have been certain kinds of intrenchments, which the
inhabitants call "King Arthur's Palace." Sir Thomas Malory says: "Sir
Ballin's sword was put into marble stone, standing it upright as a great
millstone, and it swam down the stream to the city of Camelot, that is,
in English, Wincheste." There was another Camelot, also King Arthur's
capital, on the river Camel, in Cornwall, to which Shakespeare makes
reference in _King Lear_, II, ii. Tennyson, in "Gareth and Lynette,"
describes the appearance of the city when approached in the early
morning:
"Far off they saw the silver-misty morn
Rolling her smoke about the Royal mount,
That rose between the forest and the field.
At times the summit of the high city flash'd;
At times the spires and turrets half-way down
Prick'd thro' the mist; at times the great gate shone
Only, that open'd on the field below:
Anon, the whole fair city had disappear'd."
river referred to is probably the Thames.
is presented to the imagination in the first five lines of this stanza?
How do the barges differ in appearance and movement from the shallop
mentioned two lines below?
which is presented in this stanza.
Knights. The red-cross Knight in Spenser's _Faerie Queene_ symbolizes
holiness.
"And on his brest a bloodie crosse he bore,
The deare remembrance of his dying Lord,
For whose sweete sake that glorious badge he wore,
And dead, as living ever, him ador'd;
Upon his shield the like was also scor'd,
For soveraine hope, which in his helpe he had.
Right, faithfull, true he was in deede and word;
But of his cheere did seeme too solemne sad;
Yet nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad."
direction in which it moves. The beard of a comet is the light which it
throws out in front of it, in distinction from the tail or rays behind.
note of the lark.
I come from haunts of coot{1} and hern,{2}
I make a sudden sally,
And sparkle out among the fern,
To bicker{3} down a valley.
By thirty hills I hurry down,
Or slip between the ridges,
By twenty thorps,{4} a little town,
And half a hundred bridges.
Till last by Philip's farm I flow
To join the brimming river,
For men may come and men may go,
But I go on forever.
I chatter over stony ways,
In little sharps and trebles,
I bubble into eddying bays,
I babble on the pebbles.
With many a curve my banks I fret
By many a field and fallow,
And many a fairy foreland{5} set
With willow-weed and mallow.
I chatter, chatter, as I flow
To join the brimming river,
For men may come and men may go,
But I go on forever.
I wind about, and in and out,
With here a blossom sailing,
And here and there a lusty trout,
And here and there a grayling,
And here and there a foamy flake
Upon me, as I travel,
With many a silvery waterbreak
Above the golden gravel,
And draw them all along, and flow
To join the brimming river,
For men may come and men may go,
But I go on forever.
I steal by lawns and grassy plots,
I slide by hazel{6} covers;
I move the sweet forget-me-nots
That grow for happy lovers.
I slip, I slide, I gloom,{7} I glance,
Among my skimming swallows;
I make the netted sunbeams dance
Against my shady shallows.
I murmur under moon and stars
In brambly wildernesses;
I linger by my shingly{8} bars;
I loiter round my cresses;
And out again I curve and flow
To join the brimming river,
For men may come and men may go,
But I go on forever.
This little lyric forms a part of "an idyl" of the same title, published
in 1855. The poet introduces it in the following manner:
"Here, by this brook, we parted; I to the East
And he to Italy--too late--too late:
. . . . . . . . . Yet the brook he loved
. . . . . . . seems, as I re-listen to it,
Prattling the primrose fancies of the boy,
To me that loved him; for, 'O brook,' he says,
'O babbling brook,' says Edmund in his rhyme,
'Whence come you?' and the brook, why not? replies:
'I come from haunts of coot and hern,'" etc.
In reading this poem, observe how strikingly the sound is made to
correspond to the sense.
"Courage!" he said, and pointed toward the land;
"This mounting wave will roll us shoreward soon."
In the afternoon they came unto a land,
In which it seemed always afternoon.
All round the coast the languid air did swoon,
Breathing like one that hath a weary dream.
Full-faced above the valley stood the moon;
And like a downward smoke, the slender stream
Along the cliff to fall and pause and fall did seem.
A land of streams! some, like a downward smoke,
Slow-dropping veils of thinnest lawn, did go;
And some through wavering lights and shadows broke
Rolling a slumbrous sheet of foam below.
They saw the gleaming river seaward flow
From the inner land: far off, three mountain-tops,
Three silent pinnacles of aged snow,
Stood sunset-flushed: and, dewed with showery drops,
Up-clomb the shadowy pine above the woven copse.
The charmed sunset lingered low adown
In the red West: through mountain clefts the dale
Was seen far inland, and the yellow down
Bordered with palm, and many a winding vale
And meadow, set with slender galingale;
A land where all things always seemed the same!
And round about the keel with faces pale,
Dark faces pale against that rosy flame,
The mild-eyed melancholy Lotos-eaters came.
Branches they bore of that enchanted stem,
Laden with flower and fruit, whereof they gave
To each, but whoso did receive of them,
And taste, to him the gushing of the wave
Far, far away did seem to mourn and rave
On alien shores; and if his fellow spake,
His voice was thin, as voices from the grave;
And deep-asleep he seemed, yet all awake,
And music in his ears his beating heart did make.
They sat them down upon the yellow sand,
Between the sun and moon upon the shore;
And sweet it was to dream of Father-land,
Of child and wife, and slave; but evermore
Most weary seemed the sea, weary the oar,
Weary the wandering fields of barren foam.
Then some one said, "We will return no more;"
And all at once they sang, "Our island home
Is far beyond the wave; we will no longer roam."
There is sweet music here that softer falls
Than petals from blown roses on the grass,
Or night-dews on still waters between walls
Of shadowy granite, in a gleaming pass;
Music that gentlier on the spirit lies,
Than tired eyelids upon tired eyes;
Music that brings sweet sleep down from the blissful skies.
Here are cool mosses deep.
And thro' the moss the ivies creep,
And in the stream the long-leaved flowers weep,
And from the craggy ledge the poppy hangs in sleep.
Why are we weighed upon with heaviness,
And utterly consumed with sharp distress,
While all things else have rest from weariness?
All things have rest: why should we toil alone,
We only toil, who are the first of things,
And make perpetual moan,
Still from one sorrow to another thrown:
Nor ever fold our wings,
And cease from wanderings,
Nor steep our brows in slumber's holy balm;
Nor hearken what the inner spirit sings,
"There is no joy but calm!"
Why should we only toil, the roof and crown of things?
Lo! in the middle of the wood,
The folded leaf is woo'd from out the bud
With winds upon the branch, and there
Grows green and broad, and takes no care,
Sun-steeped at noon, and in the moon
Nightly dew-fed; and turning yellow
Falls, and floats adown the air.
Lo! sweetened with the summer light,
The full-juiced apple, waxing over-mellow,
Drops in a silent autumn night.
All its allotted length of days,
The flower ripens in its place,
Ripens and fades, and falls, and hath no toil,
Fast-rooted in the fruitful soil.
Hateful is the dark-blue sky,
Vaulted o'er the dark-blue sea.
Death is the end of life; ah, why
Should life all labour be?
Let us alone. Time driveth onward fast,
And in a little while our lips are dumb.
Let us alone. What is it that will last?
All things are taken from us, and become
Portions and parcels of the dreadful Past.
Let us alone. What pleasure can we have
To war with evil? Is there any peace
In ever climbing up the climbing wave?
All things have rest, and ripen toward the grave
In silence; ripen, fall, and cease:
Give us long rest or death, dark death, or dreamful ease.
How sweet it were, hearing the downward stream,
With half-shut eyes ever to seem
Falling asleep in a half-dream!
To dream and dream, like yonder amber light
Which will not leave the myrrh-bush on the height;
To hear each other's whispered speech;
Eating the Lotos day by day,
To watch the crisping ripples on the beach,
And tender curving lines of creamy spray;
To lend our hearts and spirits wholly
To the influence of mild-minded melancholy;
To muse and brood and live again in memory,
With those old faces of our infancy
Heaped over with a mound of grass,
Two handfuls of white dust, shut in an urn of brass!
Dear is the memory of our wedded lives,
And dear the last embraces of our wives
And their warm tears: but all hath suffered change;
For surely now our household hearths are cold:
Our sons inherit us: our looks are strange:
And we should come like ghosts to trouble joy.
Or else the island-princes over-bold
Have eat our substance, and the minstrel sings
Before them of the ten-years' war in Troy,
And our great deeds, as half-forgotten things.
Is there confusion in the little isle?
Let what is broken so remain.
The gods are hard to reconcile:
'Tis hard to settle order once again.
There _is_ confusion worse than death,
Trouble on trouble, pain on pain,
Long labour unto aged breath,
Sore task to hearts worn out by many wars,
And eyes grown dim with gazing on the pilot-stars.
But, propped on beds of amaranth and moly,
How sweet (while warm airs lull us, blowing lowly)
With half-dropped eyelids still,
Beneath a heaven dark and holy,
To watch the long bright river drawing slowly
His waters from the purple hill--
To hear the dewy echoes calling
From cave to cave thro' the thick-twined vine--
To watch the emerald-coloured water falling
Thro' many a wov'n acanthus-wreath divine!
Only to hear and see the far-off sparkling brine,
Only to hear were sweet, stretched out beneath the pine.
The Lotos blooms below the barren peak:
The Lotos blows by every winding creek:
All day the wind breathes low with mellower tone:
Thro' every hollow cave and alley lone
Round and round the spicy downs the yellow Lotos-dust is blown.
We have had enough of action, and of motion we,
Rolled to starboard, rolled to larboard, when the surge was
seething free,
Where the wallowing monster spouted his foam-fountains in the sea.
Let us swear an oath, and keep it with an equal mind,
In the hollow Lotos-land to live and lie reclined
On the hills like gods together, careless of mankind.
For they lie beside their nectar, and the bolts are hurled
Far below them in the valleys, and the clouds are lightly curled
Round their golden houses, girdled with the gleaming world:
Where they smile in secret, looking over wasted lands,
Blight and famine, plague and earthquake, roaring deeps and fiery
sands,
Clanging fights, and flaming towns, and sinking ships, and praying
hands.
But they smile, they find a music centred in a doleful song
Steaming up, a lamentation and an ancient tale of wrong,
Like a tale of little meaning tho' the words are strong;
Chanted from an ill-used race of men that cleave the soil,
Sow the seed, and reap the harvest with enduring toil,
Storing yearly little dues of wheat, and wine and oil;
Till they perish and they suffer--some, 'tis whispered, down in hell
Suffer endless anguish, others in Elysian valleys dwell,
Resting weary limbs at last on beds of asphodel.
Surely, surely, slumber is more sweet than toil, the shore
Than labour in the deep mid-ocean, wind and wave and oar;
Oh, rest ye, brother mariners, we will not wander more.
"Thence for nine whole days was I borne by ruinous winds over the
teeming deep; but on the tenth day we set foot on the land of the
lotus-eaters, who eat a flowery food. So we stepped ashore and drew
water, and straightway my company took their mid-day meal by the swift
ships. Now when we had tasted meat and drink, I sent forth certain of my
company to go and make search of what manner of men they were who here
live upon the earth by bread, and I chose out two of my fellows, and
sent a third with them as herald. Then straightway they went and mixed
with the men of the lotus-eaters, and so it was that the lotus-eaters
devised not death for our fellows, but gave them of the lotus to taste.
Now whosoever of them did eat the honey-sweet fruit of the lotus, had no
more wish to bring tidings nor to come back, but there he chose to abide
with the lotus-eating men, ever feeding on the lotus, and forgetful of
his homeward way. Therefore I led them back to the ships weeping, and
sore against their will, and dragged them beneath the benches, and bound
them in the hollow barques. But I commanded the rest of my well-loved
company to make speed and go on board the swift ships, lest haply any
should eat of the lotus and be forgetful of returning."--_Homer's
Odyssey_, ix, 80.
"In this poem, 'The Lotos-Eaters,' the artistic ideal of the young poet
(it was written in 1830) found its most finished expression and its
culminating point. Here he seems to have attained a consciousness that
beyond the ideal which he had adopted there is another, larger, grander,
and more satisfying. Nowhere else, perhaps, in the range of poetry, is
the trance of a listless life so harmoniously married to appropriate
melodies and appropriate accompaniments."--_North British Review._
ALFRED TENNYSON was born at Somersby, Lincolnshire, England, in 1809.
His early education was received at home from his father, who was rector
of Somersby and vicar of Bennington and Grimsby. He was afterwards sent
to Trinity College, Cambridge, where, at the age of twenty, he received
the chancellor's medal for a poem in blank verse, entitled "Timbuctoo."
In 1830 he published a small volume of "Poems chiefly Lyrical." A
revised edition of this volume, published in 1833, contained "The Lady
of Shalott," "The Lotos-Eaters," and others of his best-known short
poems. In 1850, upon the death of Wordsworth, he was appointed
poet-laureate. In the same year he was married to Emily, daughter of
Henry Sellwood, Esq., and niece of Sir John Franklin. Since 1851,
Tennyson has resided for the greater part of the time at Farringford,
Freshwater, Isle of Wight. In December, 1883, he was made Baron Tennyson
of Aldworth and Freshwater.
"Mr. Tennyson," says R. H. Hutton, "was an artist even before he was a
poet; in other words, the eye for beauty, grace, and harmony of effect
was even more emphatically one of his original gifts than the voice for
poetic utterance itself. This, probably, it is which makes his very
earliest pieces appear so full of effort, and sometimes even so full of
affectation. They were elaborate attempts to embody what he saw, before
the natural voice of the poet had come to him. I think it possible to
trace not only a pre-poetic period in his art, but to date the period at
which the soul was 'infused' into his poetry, and the brilliant external
figures became the dwelling-places of germinating poetic thoughts
creating their own music. Curiously enough, the first poem where there
is any trace of those musings of the Round Table to which he has
directed so much of his maturest genius, is also a confession that the
poet was sick of the magic mirror of fancy and its picture-shadows, and
was turning away from them to the poetry of human life. Whenever Mr.
Tennyson's pictorial fancy has had it in any degree in its power to run
away with the guiding and controlling mind, the richness and the
workmanship have to some extent overgrown the spiritual principle of his
poems. It is obvious, for instance, that even in relation to natural
scenery, what his poetical faculty delights in most are rich, luxuriant
landscapes, in which either nature or man has accumulated a lavish
variety of effects. It is in the scenery of the mill, the garden, the
chase, the down, the rich pastures, the harvest-field, the palace
pleasure-grounds, the Lord of Burleigh's fair domains, the luxuriant
sylvan beauty, bearing testimony to the careful hand of man, 'the summer
crisp with shining woods,' that Mr. Tennyson most delights. If he strays
to rarer scenes, it is almost in search of richer and more luxuriant
loveliness, like the tropical splendors of 'Enoch Arden' and the
enervating skies which cheated the Lotos-Eaters of their longing for
home."
"Mr. Tennyson," says a writer in the _North British Review_, "deserves
an especial study, not only as a poet, but as a leader and a landmark of
popular thought and feeling. As a poet, he belongs to the highest
category of English writers; for poetry is the strongest and most
vigorous branch of English literature. In this literature his works are
evidently destined to secure a permanent place; for they express in
language refined and artistic, but not unfamiliar, a large segment of
the popular thought of the period over which they range. He has,
moreover, a clearly marked if not strongly individualized style, which
has served as a model for imitators, and as a starting-point for poets
who have sought to improve upon it."
=Principal Poems of Tennyson:= Charge of the Light Brigade, written in
King, 1859-1873,--to be read in the following order: The Coming of
Arthur; Gareth and Lynette; Geraint and Enid; Merlin and Vivien;
Lancelot and Elaine; The Holy Grail; Pelleas and Ettarre; The Last
Tournament; Guinevere; The Passing of Arthur;--In Memoriam, 1850 (131
parts); Locksley Hall, 1842; Locksley Hall Sixty Years Afterwards, 1886;
Maud, 1855 (3 parts); The Princess, 1847 (7 parts); Ode on the Death of
the Duke of Wellington, 1852.
DRAMATIC PIECES: Queen Mary, 1875; Harold, 1876; The Cup, 1881; The
Falcon, 1882; Becket, 1884; The Foresters: Robin Hood and Maid Marian,
REFERENCES: Stedman's _Victorian Poets_; Van Dyke's _The Poetry of
Tennyson_; Taine's _History of English Literature_, vol. IV; Kingsley's
_Miscellanies_; Elsdale's _Studies in the Idylls_; Buchanan's _Master
Spirits_; Tainsh's _Studies in Tennyson_; Hutton's _Essays_; Chapman's
_Companion to In Memoriam_; Walters's _In Tennyson Land_.
William Wordsworth.
The Child is father{1} of the Man;
And I could wish my days to be
Bound each to each by natural piety.
There was a time when meadow, grove, and stream,
The earth, and every common sight,
To me did seem
Apparelled{2} in celestial light,
The glory and the freshness of a dream.
It is not now as it hath been of yore;--
Turn wheresoe'er I may,
By night or day,
The things which I have seen I now can see no more.
The rainbow comes and goes,
And lovely is the rose;
The moon doth with delight
Look round her when the heavens are bare;
Waters on a starry night
Are beautiful and fair;
The sunshine is a glorious birth;
But yet I know, where'er I go,
That there hath passed away a glory from the earth.
Now, while the birds thus sing a joyous song,
And while the young lambs bound
As to the tabor's{3} sound,
To me alone there came a thought of grief:
A timely utterance gave that thought relief,
And I again am strong.
The cataracts{4} blow their trumpets from the steep;
No more shall grief of mine the season wrong;
I hear the echoes{5} through the mountains throng;
The winds come to me from the fields of sleep,{6}
And all the earth is gay;
Land and sea
Give themselves up to jollity,{7}
And with the heart of May{8}
Doth every beast keep holiday.
Thou child of joy,
Shout round me, let me hear thy shouts, thou happy shepherd-boy!
Ye blessed creatures, I have heard the call
Ye to each other make; I see
The heavens laugh with you in your jubilee;
My heart is at your festival.
My head hath its coronal,{9}
The fulness of your bliss, I feel--I feel it all.
Oh evil day if I were sullen
While Earth herself is adorning
This sweet May morning,
And the children are culling
On every side,
In a thousand valleys far and wide,
Fresh flowers, while the sun shines warm,
And the babe leaps up{10} on his mother's arm:
I hear, I hear, with joy I hear!
--But there's a tree,{11} of many, one,
A single field which I have looked upon,
Both of them speak of something that is gone:
The pansy{12} at my feet
Doth the same tale repeat.
Whither is fled the visionary gleam?
Where is it now, the glory and the dream?
Our birth is but a sleep{13} and a forgetting:
The soul that rises with us, our life's star,
Hath had elsewhere its setting,
And cometh from afar;
Not in entire forgetfulness,
And not in utter nakedness,
But trailing clouds of glory do we come
From God, who is our home.
Heaven lies about us in our infancy!
Shades of the prison-house begin to close
Upon the growing boy,
But he beholds the light, and whence it flows,
He sees it in his joy;
The youth, who daily farther from the East
Must travel, still is nature's priest,
And by the vision splendid
Is on his way attended;
At length the man perceives it die away,
And fade into the light of common day.
Earth fills her lap with pleasures of her own;
Yearnings she hath in her own natural kind,
And even with something of a mother's mind,
And no unworthy aim,
The homely nurse doth all she can
To make her foster-child, her inmate man,
Forget the glories he hath known,
And that imperial palace whence he came.
Behold the child{14} among his new-born blisses,
A six years' darling of a pigmy size!
See, where 'mid work of his own hand he lies,
Fretted by sallies of his mother's kisses,
With light upon him from his father's eyes!
See at his feet some little plan or chart,
Some fragment from his dream of human life,
Shaped by himself with newly-learned art--
A wedding or a festival,
A mourning or a funeral;
And this hath now his heart,
And unto this he frames his song.
Then will he fit his tongue
To dialogues of business, love, or strife:
But it will not be long
Ere this be thrown aside,
And with new joy and pride
The little actor cons another part,
Filling from time to time his 'humorous stage'{15}
With all the persons, down to palsied age,
That Life brings with her in her equipage,
As if his whole vocation
Were endless imitation.
Thou, whose exterior semblance doth belie
Thy soul's immensity;
Thou, best philosopher, who yet dost keep
Thy heritage, thou eye among the blind,
That, deaf and silent, read'st the eternal deep,
Haunted for ever by the eternal mind,--
Mighty prophet! seer blest!{16}
On whom those truths do rest,
Which we are toiling all our lives to find,
In darkness lost, the darkness of the grave;
Thou, over whom thy immortality
Broods like the day, a master o'er a slave,
A presence which is not to be put by;
Thou little child, yet glorious in the might
Of heaven-born freedom on thy being's height,
Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke
The years to bring the inevitable yoke,
Thus blindly with thy blessedness at strife?
Full soon thy soul shall have her earthly freight,
And custom lie upon thee with a weight,
Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life!
O joy, that in our embers
Is something that doth live,
That nature yet remembers
What was so fugitive!
The thought of our past years in me doth breed
Perpetual benediction: not indeed
For that which is most worthy to be blest--
Delight and liberty, the simple creed
Of childhood, whether busy or at rest,
With new-fledged hope still fluttering in his breast:--
Not for these I raise
The song of thanks and praise;
But for those obstinate questionings
Of sense and outward things,
Fallings from us, vanishings;{17}
Blank misgivings{18} of a creature
Moving about in worlds not realized,
High instincts before which our mortal nature
Did tremble like a guilty thing surprised:
But for those first affections,
Those shadowy recollections,
Which, be they what they may,
Are yet the fountain light of all our day,
Are yet a master light of all our seeing;
Uphold us, cherish, and have power to make
Our noisy years seem moments in the being
Of the eternal silence: truths that wake,
To perish never;
Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavor,
Nor man nor boy,
Nor all that is at enmity with joy,
Can utterly abolish or destroy!
Hence in a season of calm weather,
Though inland far we be,
Our souls have sight of that immortal sea
Which brought us hither,
Can in a moment travel thither,
And see the children sport upon the shore,
And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.
Then sing, ye birds! sing, sing a joyous song!
And let the young lambs bound
As to the tabor's sound!
We in thought will join your throng,
Ye that pipe and ye that play,
Ye that through your hearts to-day
Feel the gladness of the May!
What though the radiance which was once so bright
Be now forever taken from my sight,
Though nothing can bring back the hour
Of splendor in the grass, of glory in the flower?
We will grieve not, rather find
Strength in what remains behind;
In the primal sympathy
Which, having been, must ever be;
In the soothing thoughts that spring
Out of human suffering;
In the faith that looks through death,
In years that bring the philosophic mind.
And O ye fountains, meadows, hills, and groves,
Forebode not any severing of our loves!
Yet in my heart of hearts I feel your might;
I only have relinquished one delight
To live beneath your more habitual sway.
I love the brooks, which down their channels fret,
Even more than when I tripped lightly as they:
The innocent brightness of a new-born day
Is lovely yet:
The clouds that gather round the setting sun{19}
Do take a sober coloring from an eye
That hath kept watch o'er man's mortality;
Another race hath been, and other palms are won.
Thanks to the human heart by which we live,
Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears,
To me the meanest flower that blows can give
Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.
"This was composed," says Wordsworth, "during my residence at Town-End,
Grasmere (1803-1806). Two years at least passed between the writing of
the first four stanzas and the remaining part. To the attentive and
competent reader the whole sufficiently explains itself, but there may
be no harm in adverting here to particular feelings or experiences of my
own mind on which the structure of the poem partly rests. Nothing was
more difficult for me in childhood than to admit the notion of death as
a state applicable to my own being. I have said elsewhere:
'A simple child
That lightly draws its breath,
And feels its life in every limb,
"But it was not so much from the source of animal vivacity that _my_
difficulty came, as from a sense of the indomitableness of the spirit
within me. I used to brood over the stories of Enoch and Elijah, and
almost persuade myself that, whatever might become of others, I should
be translated in something of the same way to heaven. With a feeling
congenial to this, I was often unable to think of external things as
having external existence, and I communed with all that I saw as
something not apart from, but inherent in, my own immaterial nature.
Many times while going to school have I grasped at a wall or tree to
recall myself from this abyss of idealism to reality. At that time I was
afraid of mere processes. In later periods of life I have deplored, as
we have all reason to do, a subjugation of an opposite character, and
have rejoiced over the remembrances, as is expressed in the lines,
_Obstinate questionings_, etc. To that dream-like vividness and splendor
which invests objects of sight in childhood every one, I believe, if he
could look back, could bear testimony, and I need not dwell upon it
here; but having in the poem regarded it as a presumptive evidence of a
prior state of existence, I think it right to protest against a
conclusion which has given pain to some good and pious persons, that I
meant to inculcate such a belief. It is far too shadowy a notion to be
recommended to faith as more than an element in our instincts of
immortality. But let us bear in mind that, though the idea is not
advanced in Revelation, there is nothing there to contradict it, and the
fall of man presents an analogy in its favor. Accordingly, a
pre-existent state has entered into the popular creeds of many nations,
and among all persons acquainted with classic literature is known as an
ingredient in Platonic philosophy. Archimedes said that he could move
the world if he had a point whereon to rest his machine. Who has not
felt the same aspirations as regards the world of his mind? Having to
wield some of its elements when I was impelled to write this poem on the
'Immortality of the Soul,' I took hold of the notion of pre-existence as
having sufficient foundation in humanity for authorizing me to make for
my purpose the best use of it I could as a poet."
Lord Houghton says of this poem: "If I am asked what is the greatest
poem in the English language, I never for a moment hesitate to say,
Wordsworth's 'Ode on the Intimations of Immortality.'"
Principal Shairp says: "'The Ode on Immortality' marks the highest limit
which the tide of poetic inspiration has reached in England within this
century, or indeed since the days of Milton."
The idea of the pre-existence of the soul had already been treated by
Henry Vaughan in "Silex Scintillans" (1655).
"Happy those infant days, when I
Shined in my angel-infancy!
Before I understood this place
Appointed for my second race,
Or taught my soul to fancy aught
But a white, celestial thought;
When yet I had not walked above
A mile or two from my first Love,
And looking back at that short space
Could see a glimpse of his bright face."
Shelley, in "A Lament," hints at the same thought:
"O world! O life! O time!
On whose last steps I climb,
Trembling at that where I had stood before,
When will return the glory of your prime?
No more--oh, never more!
"Out of the day and night
A joy has taken flight;
Fresh spring, and summer, and winter hoar,
Move my faint heart with grief, but with delight
No more--oh, never more!"
Wordsworth, entitled "My Heart leaps up":
"My heart leaps up when I behold
A rainbow in the sky.
So was it when my life began;
So is it now I am a man;
So be it when I shall grow old,
Or let me die!
The child is father of the man;
And I could wish my days to be
Bound each to each by natural piety."
Compare with Milton's lines in 'Paradise Regained,' Bk. IV:
"The childhood shows the man
As morning shows the day."
_pair_, _compare_, etc., are similarly derived. To _apparel_ is strictly
to pair, to suit, to put like to like.
_tambourine_. Originally from the root _tap_, Gr. _tup_, to strike
lightly. An ancient musical instrument,--a small one-ended drum having a
handle projecting from the frame, by which it was held in the left hand,
while it was beaten with a stick held in the right hand.
his own lake country. The metaphor which he uses is a bold one.
"Lost Echo sits amid the voiceless mountains."
--_Adonais_, 127.
side."--_Hales._ "The fields that were dark during the hours of
sleep."--_Knight._
"Haste thee nymph and bring with thee
Jest and youthful jollity."
especially is full of May raptures. Chaucer says:
"For May will have no sluggardy a-night:
The season pricketh every gentle heart,
And maketh him out of his sleep to start."
such occasions it was usual for the host to give chaplets to his guests.
Festoons of flowers were also sometimes hung over their necks and
breasts. The chaplet, or coronal, was regarded as a cheerful ornament
and symbol of festivity.
up," on page 46.
following lines:
"Only, one little sight, one plant,
. . . whene'er the leaf grows there
Its drop comes from my heart, that's all."
--_Browning's May and Death._
to think. "It probably derived its name, thought or fancy, from its
fanciful appearance."--_Nares._ Another derivation of the word is from
_panacea_, meaning _all-heal_, a name given by the Greeks to a plant
which was popularly supposed to cure diseases and dispel sorrow. The
notion that the pansy is a cure for grief is shown in its common English
name, _heart's-ease_.
one of the ancient philosophers. The doctrine of metempsychosis, a form
of the same idea, was held by the ancient Egyptians and is still
maintained by the Buddhists. Tennyson says:
"As old mythologies relate,
Some draught of Lethe might await
The slipping through from state to state.
"And if I lapsed from nobler place,
Some legend of a fallen race
Alone might hint of my disgrace."--_Two Voices._
"Behold the child, by Nature's kindly law,
Pleased with a rattle, tickled with a straw;
Some livelier plaything gives his youth delight,
A little louder, but as empty quite."--_Essay on Man._
When Wordsworth wrote of
"A six years' darling of a pigmy size,"
he probably had in mind Hartley Coleridge, who was then a child of that
age. See his poem "To Hartley Coleridge, Six Years Old."
a stage," "As You like It," Act ii, sc. 7. The word _humorous_ has here
a special sense, such as is used by Ben Jonson in his "Every Man in his
Humor."
says: "These expressions taken separately have scarcely any recognizable
meaning. By taking them all together, we feel rather than see that
Wordsworth intended to say that the child, having lately come from a
perfect existence, in which he saw truth directly, and was at home with
God, retains, unknown to us, that vision;--and, because he does, is the
best philosopher, since he sees at once that which we through philosophy
are endeavoring to reach; is the mighty prophet, because in his actions
and speech he tells unconsciously the truths he sees, but the sight of
which we have lost; is more closely haunted by God, more near to the
immortal life, more purely and brightly free because he half shares in
the pre-existent life and glory out of which he has come."--_Theology in
the English Poets._
abstraction, when nothing material seems solid, but everything mere mist
and shadow."--_Hales._
"Moreover, something is or seems,
That touches me with mystic gleams,
Like glimpses of forgotten dreams;
"Of something felt, like something here;
Of something done, I know not where;
Such as no language may declare."
Wordsworth's "Excursion":
"Ah! why in age
Do we revert so fondly to the walks
Of childhood, but that there the soul discerns
The dear memorial footsteps unimpair'd
Of her own native vigor, thence can hear
Reverberations and a choral song,
Commingling with the incense that ascends
Undaunted toward the imperishable heavens,
From her own lonely altar?"
Coleridge.
We walked along, while bright and red
Uprose the morning sun;
And Matthew{1} stopped, he looked, and said,
'The will of God be done!'
A village schoolmaster was he,
With hair of glittering gray;
As blithe a man as you could see
On a spring holiday.
And on that morning, through the grass,
And by the steaming rills,
We travelled merrily, to pass
A day among the hills.
'Our work,' said I, 'was well begun:
Then, from thy breast what thought,
Beneath so beautiful a sun,
So sad a sigh has brought?'
A second time did Matthew stop,
And fixing still his eye
Upon the eastern mountain-top,
To me he made reply:
'Yon cloud with that long purple cleft
Brings fresh into my mind
A day like this which I have left
Full thirty years behind.
And just above yon slope of corn
Such colors, and no other,
Were in the sky, that April morn,
Of this the very brother.
With rod and line I sued the sport
Which that sweet season gave,
And, to the church-yard come, stopped short
Beside my daughter's grave.
Nine summers had she scarcely seen,
The pride of all the vale:
And then she sang;--she would have been
A very nightingale.
Six feet in earth my Emma lay;
And yet I loved her more,
For so it seemed, than till that day
I e'er had loved before.
And, turning from her grave, I met,
Beside the churchyard yew,
A blooming girl, whose hair was wet
With points of morning dew.
A basket on her head she bare;
Her brow was smooth and white:
To see a child so very fair,
It was a pure delight!
No fountain from its rocky cave
E'er tripped with foot so free;
She seemed as happy as a wave
That dances on the sea.
There came from me a sigh of pain
Which I could ill confine;
I looked at her, and looked again:
And did not wish her mine!'
Matthew is in his grave, yet now,
Methinks, I see him stand,
As at that moment, with a bough
Of wilding{2} in his hand.
This poem was written in 1799, and published the following year.
as being "made up of several, both of his class and men of other
occupations."
"Ten ruddy wildings in the wood I found."--_Dryden._
Behold her, single in the field,
Yon solitary highland lass!
Reaping and singing by herself;
Stop here, or gently pass!
Alone she cuts and binds the grain,
And sings a melancholy strain;
O listen! for the vale profound
Is overflowing with the sound.
No nightingale did ever chaunt
More welcome notes to weary bands
Of travellers in some shady haunt
Among Arabian sands:
A voice so thrilling ne'er was heard
In spring-time from a cuckoo-bird,
Breaking the silence of the seas
Among the farthest Hebrides.
Will no one tell me what she sings?--
Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow
For old, unhappy, far-off things,
And battles long ago:
Or is it some more humble lay,
Familiar matter of to-day?
Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain,
That has been, or may be again?
Whate'er the theme, the maiden sang
As if her song could have no ending;
I saw her singing at her work,
And o'er the sickle bending;--
I listened, motionless and still;
And, as I mounted up the hill,
The music in my heart I bore,
Long after it was heard no more.
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH was born at Cockermouth, a town in Cumberland,
England, April 7, 1770. He went to school at Hawkshead, Lancashire,
whence in his seventeenth year he was sent to St. John's College,
Cambridge. In January, 1791, he took his degree at the University, but
without having distinguished himself in any way. The next fifteen or
sixteen months were spent in France, just then in the first wild hopes
of the Revolution. "In the aspirations and hopes of the revolutionists
he was an ardent sharer; he thought that the world's great age was
beginning anew; and with all his soul he hailed so splendid an era. The
ultimate degradation of that great movement by wild lawlessness, and
then by most selfish ambition, alienated his sympathy for it." Towards
the close of 1792 he returned to England, and passed the subsequent time
among his friends in London and elsewhere till he settled with his
sister at Racedown, Dorsetshire, in 1796. In the following year they
removed to Alfoxden. It was during this period that he made the
acquaintance of Coleridge. Wordsworth had already published (1793) two
little volumes of poetry, entitled _Descriptive Sketches_ and _The
Evening Walk_; but they showed little promise of the triumphs which were
to crown his later life. In 1798 the first volume of the _Lyrical
Ballads_ was published at Bristol, which purported to be the joint work
of himself and Mr. Coleridge, but to which the latter contributed only
"The Ancient Mariner" and two or three shorter poems. After some months
spent in Germany, Wordsworth and his sister established themselves at
Grasmere, in the lake country. In 1800 he published the second volume of
the _Lyrical Ballads_, and in 1802 he married Mary Hutchinson. From 1799
to 1814 he was mainly busy with his great philosophical poem, to be
called "The Recluse," "containing views of Man, Nature, and Society," of
which "The Prelude" was to be the introduction and "The Excursion" the
Second and main Part. He designed that his minor pieces should be so
arranged in connection with this work as to "give them claim to be
likened to the little cells, oratories, and sepulchral recesses,
ordinarily included in Gothic churches." This plan, however, was never
carried out, as of the First and Third Parts only one book was written,
and it has never been published. From 1814 until his death Wordsworth
lived serenely and quietly at Rydal Mount, making occasional excursions
into Scotland and Wales, and a tour upon the continent. In 1843, upon
the death of Southey, he was appointed Poet-Laureate. His life was a
long one, of steady work and much happiness. He died April 23, 1850.
The distinguishing feature of Wordsworth's poetry is well set forth in
his own words:
"The moving accident is not my trade,
To freeze the blood I have no ready arts;
'Tis my delight, alone in summer shade,
To pipe a simple song for thinking hearts."
--_Hart-Leap Well, Part II._
"Every great poet," he said, "is a teacher; I wish either to be
considered as a teacher or as nothing."
And he avowed that the purpose of his poetry was "to console the
afflicted; to add sunshine to daylight by making the happy happier; to
teach the young and the gracious of every age _to see, to think and
feel_, and therefore to become more actively and securely virtuous."
"Love had he found in huts where poor men lie,
His daily teachings had been woods and rills,
The silence that is in the starry sky,
The sleep that is among the lonely hills."
"Wordsworth," says John Campbell Shairp, "was the first who, both in
theory and practice, shook off the trammels of the so-called poetic
diction which had tyrannized over English poetry for more than a
century. This diction of course exactly represented the half-courtly,
half-classical mode of thinking and feeling. As Wordsworth rebelled
against this conventionality of spirit, so against the outward
expression of it. The whole of the stock phrases and used-up metaphors
he discarded, and returned to living language of natural feeling, as it
is used by men, instead of the dead form of it which had got stereotyped
in books. And just as in his subjects he had taken in from the waste
much virgin soil, so in his diction he appropriated for poetic use a
large amount of words, idioms, metaphors, till then by the poets
disallowed. His shorter poems, both the earlier and the later, are, for
the most part, very models of natural, powerful, and yet sensitive
English; the language being, like a garment, woven out of, and
transparent with, the thought."
=Other Poems to be Read:= We are Seven; The Pet Lamb; To a Highland Girl;
Laodamia; Matthew; The Fountain; The Wishing Gate; To the Small
Celandine; "Three Years She Grew"; "She was a Phantom of Delight"; At
the Grave of Burns.
REFERENCES: Shairp's _Studies in Poetry and Philosophy_; Hazlitt's
_English Poets_; De Quincey's _Miscellaneous Works_; _Literature and
Life_, by E. P. Whipple; _Wordsworth_ (English Men of Letters), by
Goldwin Smith; _Yesterdays with Authors_, by James T. Fields; _Among My
Books_, Second Series, by J. R. Lowell; Matthew Arnold's Introduction to
the Poems of William Wordsworth.
Samuel Taylor Coleridge.
'Tis the middle of night by the castle clock,
And the owls have awaken'd the crowing cock,
Tu--whit!----Tu--whoo!
And hark, again! the crowing cock,
How drowsily it crew.
Sir Leoline, the Baron rich,
Hath a toothless mastiff bitch;
From her kennel beneath the rock
She maketh answer to the clock,
Four for the quarters, and twelve for the hour;
Ever and aye, by shine and shower,
Sixteen short howls, not over loud;
Some say, she sees my lady's shroud.
Is the night chilly and dark?
The night is chilly, but not dark.
The thin gray cloud is spread on high,
It covers but not hides the sky.
The moon is behind, and at the full;
And yet she looks both small and dull.
The night is chill, the cloud is gray:
'Tis a month before the month of May,
And the Spring comes slowly up this way.
The lovely lady, Christabel,
Whom her father loves so well,
What makes her in the wood so late,
A furlong from the castle gate?
She had dreams all yesternight
Of her own betrothed knight;
Dreams that made her moan and leap
As on her bed she lay in sleep;
And she in the midnight wood will pray
For the weal of her lover that's far away.
She stole along, she nothing spoke,
The sighs she heaved were soft and low,
And naught was green upon the oak
But moss and rarest mistletoe:
She kneels beneath the huge oak tree,
And in silence prayeth she.
The lady sprang up suddenly,
The lovely lady, Christabel!
It moaned as near as near can be,
But what it is she cannot tell.--
On the other side it seems to be
Of the huge, broad-breasted, old oak tree.
The night is chill; the forest bare;
Is it the wind that moaneth bleak?
There is not wind enough in the air
To move away the ringlet curl
From the lovely lady's cheek--
There is not wind enough to twirl
The one red leaf, the last of its clan,
That dances as often as dance it can,
Hanging so light, and hanging so high,
On the topmost twig that looks up at the sky.
Hush, beating heart of Christabel!
Jesu, Maria, shield her well!
She folded her arms beneath her cloak,
And stole to the other side of the oak.
What sees she there?
There she sees a damsel bright,
Drest in a silken robe of white,
That shadowy in the moonlight shone:
The neck that made that white robe wan,
Her stately neck and arms were bare;
Her blue-vein'd feet unsandal'd were,
And wildly glitter'd here and there,
The gems entangled in her hair.
I guess, 'twas frightful there to see
A lady so richly clad as she--
Beautiful exceedingly!
"Mary, mother, save me now!"
(Said Christabel,) "And who art thou?"
The lady strange made answer meet,
And her voice was faint and sweet:--
"Have pity on my sore distress,
I scarce can speak for weariness:
Stretch forth thy hand, and have no fear!"
Said Christabel, "How camest thou here?"
And the lady, whose voice was faint and sweet,
Did thus pursue her answer meet:--
"My sire is of a noble line,
And my name is Geraldine:
Five warriors seized me yestermorn,
Me, even me, a maid forlorn:
They choked my cries with force and fright,
And tied me on a palfrey white.
The palfrey was as fleet as wind,
And they rode furiously behind.
They spurred amain, their steeds were white:
And once we cross'd the shade of night.
As sure as Heaven shall rescue me,
I have no thought what men they be;
Nor do I know how long it is
(For I have lain entranced I wis)
Since one, the tallest of the five,
Took me from the palfrey's back,
A weary woman, scarce alive.
Some mutter'd words his comrades spoke:
He placed me underneath this oak;
He swore they would return with haste;
Whither they went I cannot tell--
I thought I heard, some minutes past,
Sounds as of a castle bell.
Stretch forth thy hand" (thus ended she),
"And help a wretched maid to flee."
Then Christabel stretch'd forth her hand
And comforted fair Geraldine;
"O well, bright dame! may you command
The service of Sir Leoline;
And gladly our stout chivalry
Will he send forth and friends withal
To guide and guard you safe and free
Home to your noble father's hall."
She rose: and forth with steps they pass'd
That strove to be, and were not, fast.
Her gracious stars the lady blest,
And thus spake on sweet Christabel:
"All our household are at rest,
The hall is silent as the cell;
Sir Leoline is weak in health,
And may not well awaken'd be,
But we will move as if in stealth,
And I beseech your courtesy,
This night, to share your couch with me."
They cross'd the moat, and Christabel
Took the key that fitted well;
A little door she open'd straight,
All in the middle of the gate;
The gate that was iron'd within and without,
Where an army in battle array had march'd out.
The lady sank, belike through pain,
And Christabel with might and main
Lifted her up, a weary weight,
Over the threshold of the gate:
Then the lady rose again,
And moved, as she were not in pain.
So free from danger, free from fear,
They cross'd the court: right glad they were.
And Christabel devoutly cried
To the lady by her side;
"Praise we the Virgin all divine
Who hath rescued thee from thy distress!"
"Alas, alas!" said Geraldine,
"I cannot speak for weariness."
So free from danger, free from fear,
They cross'd the court: right glad they were.
Outside her kennel the mastiff old
Lay fast asleep, in moonshine cold.
The mastiff old did not awake,
Yet she an angry moan did make!
And what can ail the mastiff bitch?
Never till now she utter'd yell
Beneath the eye of Christabel.
Perhaps it is the owlet's scritch:
For what can ail the mastiff bitch?
They pass'd the hall, that echoes still,
Pass as lightly as you will!
The brands were flat, the brands were dying,
Amid their own white ashes lying;
But when the lady pass'd, there came
A tongue of light, a fit of flame;
And Christabel saw the lady's eye,
And nothing else saw she thereby,
Save the boss of the shield of Sir Leoline tall,
Which hung in a murky old niche in the wall.
"O softly tread," said Christabel,
"My father seldom sleepeth well."
Sweet Christabel her feet both bare,
And, jealous of the listening air,
They steal their way from stair to stair,
Now in glimmer, and now in gloom,
And now they pass the Baron's room,
And still as death, with stifled breath!
And now have reach'd her chamber door;
And now doth Geraldine press down
The rushes of the chamber floor.
The moon shines dim in the open air,
And not a moonbeam enters here.
But they without its light can see
The chamber carved so curiously,
Carved with figures strange and sweet,
All made out of the carver's brain,
For a lady's chamber meet:
The lamp with twofold silver chain
Is fasten'd to an angel's feet.
The silver lamp burns dead and dim;
But Christabel the lamp will trim.
She trimm'd the lamp, and made it bright,
And left it swinging to and fro,
While Geraldine, in wretched plight,
Sank down upon the floor below.
"O weary lady, Geraldine,
I pray you, drink this cordial wine!
It is a wine of virtuous powers;
My mother made it of wild flowers."
"And will your mother pity me,
Who am a maiden most forlorn?"
Christabel answered--"Woe is me!
She died the hour that I was born.
I have heard the gray-hair'd friar tell,
How on her death-bed she did say,
That she should hear the castle-bell
Strike twelve upon my wedding-day.
O mother dear! that thou wert here!"
"I would," said Geraldine, "she were!"
But soon with altered voice, said she--
"Off, wandering mother! Peak and pine!
I have power to bid thee flee."
Alas! what ails poor Geraldine?
Why stares she with unsettled eye?
Can she the bodiless dead espy?
And why with hollow voice cries she,
"Off, woman, off! this hour is mine--
Though thou her guardian spirit be,
Off, woman, off! 'tis given to me."
Then Christabel knelt by the lady's side,
And raised to heaven her eyes so blue--
"Alas!" said she, "this ghastly ride--
Dear lady! it hath wilder'd you!"
The lady wiped her moist cold brow,
And faintly said, "'Tis over now!"
Again the wild-flower wine she drank:
Her fair large eyes 'gan glitter bright,
And from the floor whereon she sank,
The lofty lady stood upright:
She was most beautiful to see,
Like a lady of a far countrée.
And thus the lofty lady spake--
"All they who live in the upper sky,
Do love you, holy Christabel!
And you love them, and for their sake
And for the good which me befell,
Even I in my degree will try,
Fair maiden, to requite you well.
But now unrobe yourself; for I
Must pray, ere yet in bed I lie."
Quoth Christabel, "So let it be!"
And as the lady bade, did she.
Her gentle limbs did she undress,
And lay down in her loveliness.
But through her brain of weal and woe
So many thoughts move to and fro,
That vain it were her lids to close;
So half-way from the bed she rose,
And on her elbow did recline
To look at the lady Geraldine.
Beneath the lamp the lady bow'd,
And slowly roll'd her eyes around;
Then drawing in her breath aloud
Like one that shudder'd, she unbound
The cincture from beneath her breast;
Her silken robe and inner vest,
Dropt to her feet, and full in view,
Behold! her bosom and half her side--
A sight to dream of, not to tell!
O shield her! shield sweet Christabel.
Yet Geraldine nor speaks nor stirs;
Ah! what a stricken look was hers!
Deep from within seems half-way
To lift some weight with sick assay,
And eyes the maid and seeks delay;
Then suddenly as one defied
Collects herself in scorn and pride,
And lay down by the maiden's side!--
And in her arms the maid she took,
Ah, well-a-day!
And with low voice and doleful look
These words did say:
"In the touch of this bosom there worketh a spell
Which is lord of thy utterance, Christabel!
Thou knowest to-night, and wilt know to-morrow
This mark of my shame, this seal of my sorrow;
But vainly thou warrest,
For this is alone in
Thy power to declare,
That in the dim forest
Thou heardest a low moaning,
And foundest a bright lady, surpassingly fair:
And didst bring her home with thee in love and in charity,
To shield her and shelter her from the damp air."
The first part of the unfinished poem, "Christabel," was written in
incomplete as before, in 1808. The two parts were first published in
pursued and persecuted by the powers of evil. Its incompleteness seems
to enhance its interest. "Completion could scarcely have failed to
lessen its reality, for the reader could not have endured, neither could
the poet's own theory have endured, the sacrifice of Christabel, the
triumph of evil over good; and had she triumphed, there is a vulgar
well-being in victory which has nothing to do with such a strain."
"Such is the unfinished and unfinishable tale of Christabel--a poem
which, despite its broken notes and over-brevity, has raised its author
to the highest rank of poets, and which in itself is at once one of
the sweetest, loftiest, most spiritual utterances that has ever
been framed in English words. We know of no existing poem in any
language to which we can compare it. It stands by itself exquisite,
celestial, ethereal,--a song of the spheres,--yet full of such
pathos and tenderness and sorrowful beauty as only humanity can
give."--_Blackwood's Magazine_, 1871.
It is worthy of note that "Christabel" was the immediate inspiration of
Scott's "Lay of the Last Minstrel." "It is to Mr. Coleridge," says Sir
Walter, "that I am bound to make the acknowledgment due from the pupil
to his master." "But certainly," says Hales, "Scott himself never
succeeded in surrounding any one of his works with so fine an atmosphere
of glamour and romance."
The language and metrical arrangement of this poem are not only peculiar
but are in full accord with the weird and fantastic conception of the
piece as a whole. The versification is based upon a principle not
commonly practised--that of counting the number of accentuated words in
a line instead of the number of syllables. Though the latter varies from
seven to twelve, yet in each line the accents never exceed four. The
result is an irregular, but strangely beautiful harmony of a kind that
can hardly be attained through the ordinary methods of versification.
This poem is to be studied for its exquisite beauty, for the true poetic
qualities which it possesses and which distinguish it from mere verse.
Hence, no explanatory notes are given with reference to any particular
passage, nor is it desirable that it should be analyzed with a view to
grammatical or philological study. It should be read and reread until
the student is thoroughly in accord with the poetic spirit which
breathes in and vivifies the entire production. "It was indolence, no
doubt, that left the tale half told--indolence and misery--and a poetic
instinct higher than all the better impulses of industry and virtuous
gain. The subject by its very nature was incomplete; it had to be left a
lovely, weird suggestion--a vision for every eye that could see."
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE was born at Ottery Saint Mary, October 21, 1772.
He was educated at Christ's Hospital and at Jesus College, Cambridge. At
the age of twenty-two he left the University without having taken a
degree. He was an intimate friend of Charles Lamb and Southey, and with
the latter formed a wild scheme for the founding of a "Pantisocratic
State" in America, which, however, was soon abandoned. His first book of
poetry was published in 1794. In 1796 he and Charles Lamb published a
volume of poems together. He soon afterwards became acquainted with
Wordsworth, and in 1798 the two brought out their famous volume of
_Lyrical Ballads_, containing some of Wordsworth's best pieces and
Coleridge's "Ancient Mariner." "Christabel," after lying in manuscript
for several years, was published in 1816, three editions being issued
within twelve months. Coleridge's chief poems were published in 1817 in
a collection entitled _Sibylline Leaves_, so called, he says, "in
allusion to the fragmentary and wildly scattered state in which they had
long been suffered to remain." At about the same time he was received
into the house of Mr. Gillman, a surgeon residing at Highgate, in order
to be cured if possible of his excessive use of opium. Here he produced
his more important prose works, _Aids to Reflection_, and _On the
Constitution of Church and State_; and here he died, July 25, 1834.
Coleridge was forever planning and designing,--beginning a work and
leaving its completion until to-morrow--which never came. He devoted his
attention only sparingly to poetry--and that chiefly during his youth.
Later in life he was occupied with political, social, and religious
questions. "He was a living Hamlet, full of the most splendid thoughts
and the noblest purposes, but a most incompetent doer." "His mind,"
wrote Southey, "is a perpetual St. Vitus's dance--eternal activity
without action."
"Of Coleridge's best verses," says Swinburne, "I venture to affirm that
the world has nothing like them, and can never have; that they are of
the highest kind, and of their own. They are jewels of the diamond's
price, flowers of the rose's rank, but unlike any rose or diamond
known."
"His best work is but little," says Stopford Brooke, "but of its kind it
is perfect and unique. . . . All that he did excellently might be bound
up in twenty pages, but it should be bound in pure gold."
=Other Poems to be Read:= The Rime of the Ancient Mariner; Hymn before
Sunrise in the Vale of Chamouni; Ode to France; Genevieve.
REFERENCES: Swinburne's _Studies and Essays_; Shairp's _Studies in
Poetry_; Carlyle's _Reminiscences_; Coleridge's _Biographia Literaria_;
De Quincey's _Essays_; _Coleridge_ (English Men of Letters), by H. D.
Traill; Hazlitt's _English Poets_; Hunt's _Imagination and Fancy_;
Chorley's _Authors of England_; Walter Pater's _Apprecia_.
Percy Bysshe Shelley.
Hail to thee, blithe spirit!
Bird thou never wert,
That from heaven, or near it,
Pourest thy full heart
In profuse{1} strains of unpremeditated art.
Higher still, and higher,
From the earth thou springest
Like a cloud of fire;
The deep blue thou wingest,{2}
And singing still dost soar, and soaring ever singest.
In the golden lightning
Of the sunken sun,{3}
O'er which clouds are brightening,
Thou dost float and run,
Like an unbodied joy whose race is just begun.
The pale purple even
Melts around thy flight;
Like a star of heaven,
In the broad daylight
Thou art unseen, but yet I hear thy shrill delight.
Keen as are the arrows
Of that silver sphere,
Whose intense lamp narrows
In the white dawn clear,
Until we hardly see, we feel that it is there.
All the earth and air
With thy voice is loud,
As, when night is bare,
From one lonely cloud
The moon rains{4} out her beams, and heaven is overflowed.
What thou art we know not;--
What is most like thee?
From rainbow clouds there flow not
Drops so bright to see,
As from thy presence showers a rain of melody.
Like a poet hidden
In the light of thought,
Singing hymns unbidden,
Till the world is wrought{5}
To sympathy with hopes and fears it heeded not:
Like a high-born maiden
In a palace tower,
Soothing her love-laden
Soul in secret hour
With music sweet as love, which overflows her bower:
Like a glow-worm golden
In a dell of dew,
Scattering unbeholden
Its aërial hue
Among the flowers and grass, which screen it from the view:
Like a rose embowered
In its own green leaves,
By warm winds deflowered,
Till the scent it gives
Makes faint with too much sweet these heavy-winged thieves.
Sound of vernal showers
On the twinkling grass,
Rain-awakened flowers,
All that ever was
Joyous, and clear, and fresh, thy music doth surpass.
Teach us, sprite{6} or bird,
What sweet thoughts are thine:
I have never heard
Praise of love or wine
That panted forth a flood of rapture so divine.
Chorus hymeneal,{7}
Or triumphal chaunt,
Matched with thine would be all
But an empty vaunt--
A thing wherein we feel there is some hidden want.
What objects are the fountains
Of thy happy strain?
What fields, or waves, or mountains?
What shapes of sky or plain?
What love of thine own kind? what ignorance of pain?
With thy clear keen joyance
Langour cannot be:
Shadow of annoyance
Never came near thee:
Thou lovest; but ne'er knew love's sad satiety.
Waking or asleep;
Thou of death must deem
Things more true and deep
Than we mortals dream--
Or how could thy notes flow in such a crystal stream?
We look before and after,
And pine for what is not:{8}
Our sincerest laughter
With some pain is fraught:
Our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest thought.
Yet if we could scorn
Hate, and pride, and fear;
If we were things born
Not to shed a tear,
I know not how thy joy we ever should come near.
Better than all measures
Of delight and sound,
Better than all treasures
That in books are found,
Thy skill to poet were, thou scorner of the ground!
Teach me half the gladness
That thy brain must know,
Such harmonious madness
From my lips would flow,
The world should listen then, as I am listening now.
This is perhaps the most perfect lyric of its kind in the English
language. Every verse is worthy of careful study, and it should be read
and reread until its exquisite melody is felt and the subtle thoughts
which it embodies fully understood. Yet there is little in the poem
which requires annotation--the lark's song itself admits of no
explanation.
"For sweetness the 'Ode to a Skylark' is inferior only to
Coleridge, in rapturous passion to no man. It is like the bird
it sings,--enthusiastic, enchanting, profuse, continuous, and
alone,--small, but filling the heavens."--_Leigh Hunt._
"Has any one, since Shakespeare and Spenser, lighted on such tender and
such grand ecstasies?"--_Taine._
The skylark is very generally distributed over the northern portions of
the Old World, but is not found in America. Its song in the morning may
often be heard when the bird is so high as to be entirely out of sight,
and although not finely modulated is remarkably cheerful and prolonged.
A person who is accustomed to the song can tell by its variations
whether it be ascending, stationary, or descending.
pour forth.
=blue=; of =wingest=.
risen so high that it is visible to him, and he "floats and runs" in its
golden light.
says it never was a bird; here he calls it "bird or sprite."
the Intimations of Immortality."
=pine.= From A.-S. _pinan_, to pain. Our word _pain_ is derived from the
same root.
From the forests and highlands
We come, we come;
From the river-girt islands,
Where loud waves are dumb
Listening to my sweet pipings.
The wind in the reeds and the rushes,
The bees on the bells of thyme,
The birds on the myrtle-bushes,
The cicale above in the lime,
And the lizards below in the grass,
Were as silent as ever old Tmolus{1} was,
Listening to my sweet pipings.
Liquid Peneus{2} was flowing,
And all dark Tempe lay
In Pelion's shadow, outgrowing
The light of the dying day,
Speeded by my sweet pipings.
The Sileni{3} and Sylvans and Fauns,
And the Nymphs of the woods and waves,
To the edge of the moist river-lawns,
And the brink of the dewy caves,
And all that did then attend and follow,
Were silent with love,--as you now, Apollo,{4}
With envy of my sweet pipings.
I sang of the dancing stars,
I sang of the dædal{5} earth,
And of heaven, and the Giant wars,{6}
And love, and death, and birth,
And then I changed my pipings,--
Singing how down the vale of Mænalus
I pursued a maiden,{7} and clasped a reed:
Gods and men, we are all deluded thus;
It breaks in our bosom, and then we bleed.
All wept--as I think both ye now would,
If envy or age had not frozen your blood--
At the sorrow of my sweet pipings.
Pan, as described in the Homeric hymns, is "lord of all the hills and
dales": sometimes he ranges along the tops of the mountains; sometimes
pursues the game in the valleys, roams through the woods, or floats
along the streams; or drives his sheep into a cave, and there plays on
his reeds music not to be excelled by that of the sweetest singing
birds; and
"With him the clear-singing mountain-nymphs
Move quick their feet, by the dark-watered spring
In the soft mead, where crocus, hyacinths,
Fragrant and blooming, mingle with the grass
Confused, and sing, while echo peals around
The mountain's top."
Keats, in "Endymion," thus apostrophizes Pan:
"O Hearkener to the loud clapping shears,
While ever and anon to his shorn peers
A ram goes bleating: Winder of the horn,
When snouted wild-boars routing tender corn
Anger our huntsmen: Breather round our farms,
To keep off mildews, and all weather harms:
Strange ministrant of undescribed sounds,
That come a-swooning over hollow grounds,
And wither drearily on barren moors:
Dread opener of the mysterious doors
Leading to universal knowledge--see,
Great son of Dryope,
The many that are come to pay their vows
With leaves about their brows!"
between Pan and Apollo. This contest is directly referred to throughout
this poem.
Tempe, and between the mountains Ossa and Pelion, emptying finally into
the Ægean Sea. (See map of ancient Greece.)
and of every kind of sensual pleasure, and hence represented the
luxuriant powers of nature, and were connected with the worship of
Bacchus.
=Sylvans.= Deities of the fields and forests.
=Fauns.= Gods of the shepherds, flocks, and fields. A faun was usually
represented as half man and half goat.
and song, of prophecy, of the flocks and herds, of the founding of
towns, and of the sun. He was the son of Zeus and Leto, and was born on
the island of Delos. His favorite oracle was at Delphi.
architect, who designed the labyrinth at Crete in which the Minotaur was
kept.
overcame and deposed his father, Chronos, and made himself supreme ruler
of the universe. The Titans, who were opposed to him, were overcome, and
hurled into the lowest depths of Tartarus.
=Mænalus.= A mountain in Arcadia, celebrated as the favorite haunt of Pan.
Artemis. "As she was returning one day from the chase, Pan saw and loved
her; but when he would address her, she fled. The god pursued. She
reached the river Ladon, and, unable to cross it, implored the aid of
her sister nymphs; and when Pan thought to grasp the object of his
pursuit, he found his arms filled with reeds. At that moment the wind
began to agitate the reeds and produced a low musical sound. The god
took the hint, cut seven of the twigs, and formed from them his
_syrinx_, or pastoral pipe." See Ovid's _Metamorphoses_.
Emily,
A ship is floating in the harbor now;
A wind is hovering o'er the mountain's brow;
There is a path on the sea's azure floor,--
No keel has ever ploughed that path before;
The halcyons{1} brood around the foamless isles;
The treacherous ocean has forsworn its wiles;
The merry mariners are bold and free:
Say, my heart's sister, wilt thou sail with me?
Our bark is as an albatross whose nest
Is a far Eden of the purple east;
And we between her wings will sit, while Night
And Day and Storm and Calm pursue their flight,
Our ministers, along the boundless sea,
Treading each other's heels, unheededly.
It is an isle under Ionian{2} skies,
Beautiful as a wreck of paradise;
And, for{3} the harbors are not safe and good,
This land would have remained a solitude
But for some pastoral people native there,
Who from the elysian, clear, and golden air
Draw the last spirit of the age of gold,{4}--
Simple and spirited, innocent and bold.
The blue Ægean girds this chosen home,
With ever-changing sound and light and foam
Kissing the sifted sands and caverns hoar;
And all the winds wandering along the shore
Undulate with the undulating tide.
There are thick woods where sylvan forms abide;
And many a fountain, rivulet, and pond,
As clear as elemental diamond,
Or serene morning air. And far beyond,
The mossy tracks made by the goats and deer
(Which the rough shepherd treads but once a year)
Pierce into glades, caverns, and bowers, and halls
Built round with ivy, which the waterfalls
Illumining, with sound that never fails,
Accompany the noonday nightingales.
And all the place is peopled with sweet airs.{5}
The light clear element which the isle wears
Is heavy with the scent of lemon-flowers,
Which floats like mist laden with unseen showers,
And falls upon the eyelids like faint sleep;
And from the moss violets and jonquils peep,
And dart their arrowy odor through the brain,
Till you might faint with that delicious pain.
And every motion, odor, beam, and tone,
With that deep music is in unison:
Which is a soul within the soul,--they seem
Like echoes of an antenatal dream.{6}
It is an isle 'twixt heaven, air, earth, and sea,
Cradled, and hung in clear tranquillity;
Bright as that wandering Eden, Lucifer,{7}
Washed by the soft blue oceans of young air.{8}
It is a favored place. Famine or blight,
Pestilence, war, and earthquake, never light
Upon its mountain-peaks; blind vultures, they
Sail onward far upon their fatal way.
The wingèd storms, chaunting their thunder-psalm
To other lands, leave azure chasms of calm
Over this isle, or weep themselves in dew,
From which its fields and woods ever renew
Their green and golden immortality.
And from the sea there rise, and from the sky
There fall, clear exhalations, soft and bright,
Veil after veil, each hiding some delight:
Which sun or moon or zephyr draw aside,
Till the isle's beauty, like a naked bride
Glowing at once with love and loveliness,
Blushes and trembles at its own excess.
Yet, like a buried lamp, a soul no less
Burns in the heart of this delicious isle,
An atom of the Eternal, whose own smile
Unfolds itself, and may be felt not seen
O'er the gray rocks, blue waves, and forests green,
Filling their bare and void interstices.
This isle and house are mine, and I have vowed
Thee to be lady of the solitude.
And I have fitted up some chambers there
Looking towards the golden eastern air,
And level with the living winds which flow
Like waves above the living waves below.
I have sent books and music there, and all
Those instruments with which high spirits call
The future from its cradle, and the past
Out of its grave, and make the present last
In thoughts and joys which sleep but cannot die,
Folded within their own eternity.
Our simple life wants little, and true taste
Hires not the pale drudge Luxury to waste
The scene it would adorn; and therefore still
Nature with all her children haunts the hill.
The ringdove in the embowering ivy yet
Keeps up her love-lament; and the owls flit
Round the evening tower; and the young stars glance
Between the quick bats in their twilight dance;
The spotted deer bask in the fresh moonlight
Before our gate; and the slow silent night
Is measured by the pants of their calm sleep.
Be this our home in life; and, when years heap
Their withered hours like leaves on our decay,
Let us become the overhanging day,
The living soul, of this elysian isle--
Conscious, inseparable, one. Meanwhile
We two will rise and sit and walk together
Under the roof of blue Ionian weather;
And wander in the meadows; or ascend
The mossy mountains, where the blue heavens bend
With lightest winds to touch their paramour;{9}
Or linger where the pebble-paven shore
Under the quick faint kisses of the sea
Trembles and sparkles as with ecstasy;--
Possessing and possessed by all that is
Within that calm circumference of bliss,
And by each other, till to love and live
Be one. . . .
We shall become the same, we shall be one
Spirit within two frames, oh wherefore two?
One passion in twin hearts, which grows and grew
Till, like two meteors of expanding flame,
Those spheres instinct with it become the same,
Touch, mingle, are transfigured; ever still
Burning, yet ever inconsumable;
In one another's substance finding food,
Light flames too pure and light and unimbued
To nourish their bright lives with baser prey,
Which point to heaven and cannot pass away:
One hope within two wills, one will beneath
Two overshadowing minds, one life, one death,
One heaven, one hell, one immortality,
And one annihilation!
Woe is me!
The wingèd words on which my soul would pierce
Into the height of Love's rare universe
Are chains of lead around its flight of fire--
I pant, I sink, I tremble, I expire!
"A clever but disreputable professor at Pisa one day related to Shelley
the sad story of a beautiful and noble lady, the Contessina Emilia
Viviani, who had been confined by her father in a dismal convent of the
suburbs, to await her marriage with a distasteful husband." Shelley,
fired as ever by a tale of tyranny, was eager to visit the fair captive.
The professor accompanied him and Medwin to the convent parlor, where
they found her more lovely than even the most glowing descriptions had
led them to expect. Nor was she only beautiful. Shelley soon discovered
that she had "cultivated her mind beyond what I have ever met with in
Italian women"; and a rhapsody composed by her upon the subject of
Uranian Love--"Il Vero Amore"--justifies the belief that she possessed
an intellect of more than ordinary elevation. He took Mrs. Shelley to
see her; and both did all they could to make her convent prison less
irksome by frequent visits, by letters, by presents of flowers and
books. It was not long before Shelley's sympathy for this unfortunate
lady took the form of love, which, however spiritual and Platonic, was
not the less passionate. The result was the composition of
"Epipsychidion," the most unintelligible of all his poems to those who
have not assimilated the spirit of Plato's _Symposium_ and Dante's _Vita
Nuova_.--_J. A. Symonds._
W. M. Rossetti characterizes this poem as "a pure outpouring of poetry;
a brimming and bubbling fountain of freshness and music, magical with
its own spray rainbows."
A year after its composition, Shelley wrote: "The 'Epipsychidion' I
cannot look at. If you are curious, however, to hear what I am and have
been, it will tell you something thereof. It is an idealized history of
my life and feelings."
=Epipsychidion.= From Gr. _epi_, upon, and _psyche_, the soul. This poem
is addressed "to the noble and unfortunate Lady Emilia Viviani, now
imprisoned in the Convent of St. Anne, Pisa," and was written in 1821.
Ceyx. When her husband died she was changed into a bird,--the
kingfisher,--and, floating over the sea, she still calls for the lost
Ceyx in tones full of plaining and tears. And "whensoever she makes her
nest, a law of nature brings round what is called Halcyon's
weather--days distinguishable among all others for their serenity."
weather," below. Explain its meaning.
=elysian.= Heavenly. Pertaining to Elysium, the islands of the blest, the
Elysian fields.
page 192. See, also, poem by John Lydgate, page 275).
Immortality" (also, note 13, page 47).
"Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting."
called Lucifer, the light-bearer. From Lat. _lux_, light, and _fero_, to
bear (see note 18, page 189). The same star when seen in the evening,
following the sun, is called Hesperus.
"It was no reason then for her
To wanton with the sun, her lusty paramour."
Milton makes the sun the paramour of the earth; Shelley, the earth the
paramour of the sky.
Swifter far than summer's flight,
Swifter far than youth's delight,
Swifter far than happy night,
Art thou come and gone:
As the earth when leaves are dead,
As the night when sleep is sped,
As the heart when joy is fled,
I am left alone, alone.
The swallow Summer comes again,
The owlet Night resumes her reign,
But the wild swan Youth is fain
To fly with thee, false as thou.
My heart each day desires the morrow,
Sleep itself is turned to sorrow,
Vainly would my winter borrow
Sunny leaves from any bough.
Lilies for a bridal bed,
Roses for a matron's head,
Violets for a maiden dead,
Pansies let my flowers be:
On the living grave I bear,
Scatter them without a tear,
Let no friend, however dear,
Waste one hope, one fear, for me.
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY was born at Field Place, near Horsham in Sussex,
August 4, 1792. He was educated at Eton and at Oxford. While a student
at the latter place, he wrote a pamphlet, entitled _The Necessity of
Atheism_, which caused his expulsion from college. This occurred in
three years later, he separated. In 1816 he married Mary Godwin. In 1818
he left England for Italy, where he remained until his death by drowning
in the gulf of Spezia, July 8, 1822. His first considerable poem, "Queen
Mab," was published in 1813; "Alastor, or the Spirit of Solitude," in
in 1821. His two dramas, the "Cenci" and "Prometheus Unbound," were
issued, the former in 1819, the latter in 1821.
"Shelley's early rupture with the English world," says Hales, "lost him
all the advantages which a fuller experience of it and a longer
intercourse with it might have given. That world was no less estranged
from him than he from it. It misunderstood and misinterpreted him
throughout his career. It covered him with its opprobrium. Assuredly, he
was not the man that world painted. It by no means follows that because
Shelley did not repeat the ordinary creeds, and even mocked at them,
that he believed nothing. Shelley was never in his soul an atheist: it
was simply impossible with his nature that he should be; what he did
deny and defy was a deity whose worship seemed, as he saw the world,
consistent with the reign of selfishness and bigotry."
Lord Macaulay says: "We doubt whether any modern poet has possessed in
an equal degree some of the highest qualities of the great ancient
masters. The words _bard_ and _inspiration_, which seem so cold and
affected when applied to other modern writers, have a perfect propriety
when applied to him. He was not an author, but a bard. His poetry seems
not to have been an art, but an inspiration. Had he lived to the full
age of man, he might not improbably, have given to the world some great
work of the very highest rank in design and execution."
Leigh Hunt says: "Assuredly, had he lived, he would have been the
greatest dramatic writer since the days of Elizabeth. In general, if
Coleridge is the sweetest of our poets, Shelley is at once the most
ethereal and most gorgeous--the one who has clothed his thoughts in
draperies of the most evanescent and most magnificent words and imagery.
His poetry is as full of mountains, seas, and skies, of light, and
darkness, and the seasons, and all the elements of our being, as if
Nature herself had written it, with the Creation and its hopes newly
cast around her, not, it must be confessed, without too indiscriminate a
mixture of great and small, and a want of sufficient shade--a certain
chaotic brilliancy, 'dark with excess of light.'"
Another English poet says: "Shelley outsang all poets on record but some
two or three throughout all time; his depths and heights of inner and
outer music are as divine as nature's, and not sooner exhaustible. He
was alone the perfect singing-god; his thoughts, words, deeds, all sang
together."
"The poet who creates a new ideal, and fills men's hearts with the flame
of a divine desire, is a practical force in the stream of human
development--and this Shelley has done. So much of his poetry is full of
the tender melancholy of the moonlight he loved, that the world is still
half blind to his highest bardic character, as the poet of a spiritual
dawn, the eager spirit who flies forward--
"Calling the lapsèd soul,
And weeping in the morning dew."
Even his moonlight seems to reflect the beams of some unrisen sun; and
his sunlight has all the ethereal exhilaration of that of the first
hours of a glorious day."--_John Todhunter._
=Other Poems to be Read:= Adonais; The Sensitive Plant; The Cloud; Mount
Blanc; To Wordsworth; The Euganean Hills; Liberty; Alastor; Prometheus
Unbound.
REFERENCES: De Quincey's _Essays_; Jeaffreson's _The Real Shelley_;
_Shelley_ (English Men of Letters), by J. A. Symonds; Leigh Hunt's
_Imagination and Fancy_; Rossetti's _Memoir of Shelley_; Dowden's _Life
of P. B. Shelley_; Moore's _Life of Lord Byron_; Middleton's _Shelley
and his Writings_; Medwin's _Life of Shelley_; Trelawney's
_Recollections of the Last Days of Shelley and Byron_; Todhunter's
_Shelley: A Study_.
John Keats.
My heart aches, and a drowsy numbness pains
My sense, as though of hemlock I had drunk,
Or emptied some dull opiate to the drains
One minute past, and Lethe-wards{1} had sunk:
'Tis not through envy of thy happy lot,
But being too happy in thy happiness,--
That thou, light-winged Dryad{2} of the trees,
In some melodious plot
Of beechen green, and shadows numberless,
Singest of summer in full-throated ease.
O for a draught of vintage, that hath been
Cooled a long age in the deep-delved earth,
Tasting of Flora and the country-green,
Dance, and Provençal song,{3} and sun-burnt mirth!
O for a beaker full of the warm South,
Full of the true, the blushful Hippocrene,{4}
With beaded bubbles winking at the brim,
And purple-stained mouth;
That I might drink, and leave the world unseen,
And with thee fade away into the forest dim:
Fade far away, dissolve, and quite forget
What thou among the leaves hast never known,
The weariness, the fever, and the fret
Here, where men sit and hear each other groan;
Where palsy shakes a few, sad, last gray hairs,
Where youth grows pale, and spectre-thin, and dies;
Where but to think is to be full of sorrow
And leaden-eyed despairs;
Where Beauty cannot keep her lustrous eyes,
Or new Love pine at them beyond to-morrow.
Away! away! for I will fly to thee,
Not charioted by Bacchus and his pards,{5}
But on the viewless wings of Poesy,
Though the dull brain perplexes and retards:
Already with thee! tender is the night,
And haply the Queen-Moon is on her throne,
Clustered around by all her starry Fays;
But here there is no light,
Save what from heaven is with the breezes blown
Through verdurous glooms and winding mossy ways.
I cannot see what flowers are at my feet,
Nor what soft incense hangs upon the boughs,
But, in embalmed darkness, guess each sweet
Wherewith the seasonable month endows
The grass, the thicket, and the fruit-tree wild;
White hawthorn, and the pastoral eglantine;{6}
Fast-fading violets covered up in leaves;
And mid-May's eldest child,
The coming musk-rose, full of dewy wine,
The murmurous haunt of flies on summer eyes.
Darkling{7} I listen; and for many a time
I have been half in love with easeful Death,
Called him soft names in many a mused rhyme,
To take into the air my quiet breath;
Now more than ever seems it rich to die,
To cease upon the midnight with no pain,
While thou art pouring forth thy soul abroad
In such an ecstasy!
Still wouldst thou sing, and I have ears in vain--
To thy high requiem{8} become a sod.
Thou wast not born for death, immortal Bird!
No hungry generations tread thee down;
The voice I hear this passing night was heard
In ancient days by emperor and clown:
Perhaps the self-same song that found a path
Through the sad heart of Ruth, when, sick for home,
She stood in tears amid the alien corn{9};
The same that oft-times hath
Charmed magic casements, opening on the foam
Of perilous seas, in faery lands forlorn.
Forlorn! the very word is like a bell
To toll me back from thee to my sole self!
Adieu! the fancy cannot cheat so well
As she is famed to do, deceiving elf.
Adieu! adieu! thy plaintive anthem fades
Past the near meadows, over the still stream,
Up the hill-side; and now 'tis buried deep
In the next valley-glades:
Was it a vision, or a waking dream?
Fled is that music:--do I wake or sleep?
"This poem," says Leigh Hunt, "was written in a house at the foot of
Highgate Hill, on the border of the fields looking towards Hampstead.
The poet had then his mortal illness upon him, and knew it; never was
the voice of death sweeter."
Hell. Its name means "forgetfulness." Milton describes it thus:
"A slow and silent stream,
Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls
Her watery labyrinth, whereof who drinks
Forthwith his former state and being forgets--
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain."
--_Paradise Lost_, ii, 583.
Dryad was supposed to be bound up with that of her tree.
"The quickening power of the soul, like Martha, is 'busy about many
things,' or, like a Dryad, living in a tree."--_Sir John Davis._
flourished in Provence, in the south of France, from the eleventh to the
thirteenth century. A love song.
fountain on Mount Helicon, Boeotia, sacred to the Muses. It was said