_First published October 1919_
_New Impressions November 1919; February 1920_
_Northern Studies_. 1879.
_Life of Gray_. 1882.
_Seventeenth-Century Studies_. 1883.
_Life of Congreve_. 1888.
_A History of Eighteenth-Century Literature_. 1889.
_Life of Philip Henry Gosse, F.R.S._ 1890.
_Gossip in a Library_. 1891.
_The Secret of Narcisse: A Romance_. 1892.
_Questions at Issue_. 1893.
_Critical Kit-Kats_. 1896.
_A Short History of Modern English Literature_. 1897.
_Life and Letters of John Donne_. 1899.
_Hypolympia_. 1901.
_Life of Jeremy Taylor_. 1904.
_French Profiles_. 1904.
_Life of Sir Thomas Browne_. 1905.
_Father and Son_. 1907.
_Life of Ibsen_. 1908.
_Two Visits to Denmark_. 1911.
_Collected Poems_. 1911.
_Portraits and Sketches_. 1912.
_Inter Arma_. 1916.
_Three French Moralists_. 1918.
Three Experiments in Portraiture--
When Voltaire sat down to write a book on Epic Poetry, he dedicated his
first chapter to "Differences of Taste in Nations." A critic of to-day
might well find it necessary, on the threshold of a general inquiry, to
expatiate on "Differences of Taste in Generations." Changes of standard
in the arts are always taking place, but it is only with advancing
years, perhaps, that we begin to be embarrassed by the recurrence of
them. In early youth we fight for the new forms of art, for the new
æsthetic shibboleths, and in that happy ardour of battle we have no time
or inclination to regret the demigods whom we dispossess. But the years
glide on, and, behold! one morning, we wake up to find our own
predilections treated with contempt, and the objects of our own idolatry
consigned to the waste-paper basket. Then the matter becomes serious,
and we must either go on struggling for a cause inevitably lost, or we
must give up the whole matter in indifference. This week I read, over
the signature of a very clever and very popular literary character of
our day, the remark that Wordsworth's was "a genteel mind of the third
rank." I put down the newspaper in which this airy dictum was printed,
and, for the first time, I was glad that poor Mr. Matthew Arnold was no
longer with us. But, of course, the evolutions of taste must go on,
whether they hurt the living and the dead, or no.
Is there, then, no such thing as a permanent element of poetic beauty?
The curious fact is that leading critics in each successive generation
are united in believing that there is, and that the reigning favourite
conforms to it. The life of a reputation is like the life of a plant,
and seems, in these days, to be like the life of an annual. We watch the
seed, admiration for Wordsworth, planted about 1795, shoot obscurely
from the ground, and gradually clothe itself with leaves till about
hung with clusters of the fruit of "permanent" appreciation. In 1919,
little more than a century from its first evolution in obscurity, it
recedes again in the raggedness of obloquy, and cumbers the earth, as
dim old "genteel" Wordsworth, whom we are assured that nobody reads. But
why were "the best judges" scornful in 1800 and again in 1919 of what
gave the noblest and the most inspiriting pleasure to "the best judges"
in 1870? The execution of the verse has not altered, the conditions of
imagination seem the same, why then is the estimate always changing? Is
every form of poetic taste, is all trained enjoyment of poetry, merely a
graduated illusion which goes up and down like a wave of the sea and
carries "the best judges" with it? If not, who is right, and who is
wrong, and what is the use of dogmatising? Let us unite to quit all vain
ambition, and prefer the jangle of the music-halls, with its direct
"æsthetic thrill."
So far as I know, the only philosopher who has dared to face this
problem is Mr. Balfour, in the brilliant second chapter of his
"Foundations of Belief." He has there asked, "Is there any fixed and
permanent element in beauty?" The result of his inquiry is
disconcerting; after much discussion he decides that there is not. Mr.
Balfour deals, in particular, with only two forms of art, Music and
Dress, but he tacitly includes the others with them. It is certain that
the result of his investigations is the singularly stultifying one that
we are not permitted to expect "permanent relations" in or behind the
feeling of poetic beauty, which may be indifferently awakened by Blake
to-day and by Hayley to-morrow. If the critic says that the verse of
Blake is beautiful and that of Hayley is not, he merely "expounds
case-made law." The result seems to be that no canons of taste exist;
that what are called "laws" of style are enacted only for those who make
them, and for those whom the makers can bully into accepting their
legislation, a new generation of lawbreakers being perfectly free to
repeal the code. Southey yesterday and Keats to-day; why not Southey
again to-morrow, or perhaps Tupper? Such is the cynical _cul-de-sac_
into which the logic of a philosopher drives us.
We have had in France an example of _volte-face_ in taste which I
confess has left me gasping. I imagine that if Mr. Balfour was able to
spare a moment from the consideration of fiscal reform, he must have
spent it in triumphing over the fate of M. Sully-Prudhomme. In the month
of September 1906 this poet closed, after a protracted agony, "that long
disease, his life." He had compelled respect by his courage in the face
of hopeless pain, and, one might suppose, some gratitude by the
abundance of his benefactions. His career was more than blameless, it
was singularly exemplary. Half-blind, half-paralysed, for a long time
very poor, pious without fanaticism, patient, laborious, devoted to his
friends, he seems to have been one of those extraordinary beings whose
fortitude in the face of affliction knows no abatement. It would be
ridiculous to quote any of these virtues as a reason for admiring the
poetry of Sully-Prudhomme. I mention them merely to show that there was
nothing in his personal temperament to arouse hatred or in his personal
conditions to excuse envy. Nothing to account for the, doubtless,
entirely sincere detestation which his poetry seemed to awaken in all
"the best minds" directly he was dead.
As every one knows, from about 1870 to 1890, Sully-Prudhomme was,
without a rival, the favourite living poet of the French. Victor Hugo
was there, of course, until 1885--and posthumously until much later--but
he was a god, and the object of idolatry. All who loved human poetry,
the poetry of sweetness and light, took Sully-Prudhomme to their heart
of hearts. The _Stances et Poèmes_ of 1865 had perhaps the warmest
welcome that ever the work of a new poet had in France. Théophile
Gautier instantly pounced upon _Le Vase Brisé_ (since too-famous) and
introduced it to a thousand school-girls. Sainte-Beuve, though grown old
and languid, waked up to celebrate the psychology and the music of this
new poetry, so delicate, fresh and transparent. An unknown beauty of
extreme refinement seemed to have been created in it, a beauty made up
of lucidity, pathos and sobriety. Readers who are now approaching
seventy will not forget with what emotion they listened, for instance,
to that dialogue between the long-dead father and the newly-buried son,
which closes:--
"J' ai laissé ma sœur et ma mère
Et les beaux livres que j' ai lus;
Vous n'avez pas de bru, mon père,
On m'a blesse, je n'aime plus."
"De tes aïeux compte le nombre,
Va baiser leurs fronts inconnus,
Et viens faire ton lit dans l'ombre
A côté des derniers venus.
"Ne pleure pas, dors dans l'argile
En espérant le grand reveit."
"O père, qu'il est difficile
De ne plus penser au soleil!"
This body of verse, to which was presently added fresh collections--_Les
Epreuves_ (1886), _Les Vaines Tendresses_ (1875), _Le Prisme_
(1886),--was welcomed by the elder Sanhedrim, and still more
vociferously and unanimously by the younger priesthood of criticism. It
pleased the superfine amateurs of poetry, it was accepted with
enthusiasm by the thousands who enjoy without analysing their enjoyment.
In 1880, to have questioned that Sully-Prudhomme was a very noble poet
would have been like challenging Tennyson in 1870, or Cowley in 1660.
Jules Lemaître claimed that he was the greatest artist in symbols that
France had ever produced. Brunetière, so seldom moved by modern
literature, celebrated with ardour the author of _Les Vaines Tendresses_
as having succeeded better than any other writer who had ever lived in
translating into perfect language the dawn and the twilight of emotion.
That Gaston Paris and M. Anatole France competed in lofty praise of the
lyrics of Sully-Prudhomme, is perhaps less remarkable than that Paul
Verlaine, whom all the younger schools still look upon as their apostle
and guide, declared, in reviewing _Les Ecuries d'Augias_, that the force
of style of Sully-Prudhomme was excelled only by the beauty of his
detail. It is needless to multiply examples of the unanimous praise
given by the divers schools of criticism to Sully-Prudhomme up to about
His death startlingly reminded us that this state of things had to be
entirely reversed. It is true that the peculiar talent of
Sully-Prudhomme, being almost exclusively lyrical, scarcely survived his
youth, and that he cumbered his moon of sands with two huge and clumsy
wrecks, _La Justice_ (1878) and _Le Bonheur_ (1898), round which the
feet of the fairies could hardly be expected to trip. One must be an
academician and hopelessly famous before one dares to inflict two
elephantine didactic epics on one's admirers. Unfortunately, too, the
poet undertook to teach the art of verse in his _Réflexions_ (1892) and
his _Testament Poétique_ (1901), brochures which greatly irritated the
young. It is probably wise for academicians, whether poets or the
reverse, to sit beside their nectar, and not to hurl bolts down into the
valley. But, behind these errors of judgment, there they remain--those
early volumes, which seemed to us all so full of exquisite little
masterpieces. Why is it that nobody, except a few elderly persons, any
longer delights in them? The notices which Sully-Prudhomme's death
awakened in the Paris Press were either stamped with the mark of old
contemporary affection, or else, when they were not abusive, were as
frigid as the tomb itself. "Ses tendresses sucrées, sirupeuses, sont
vaines en effet," said a critic of importance! Indeed, it would appear
so; and where are the laurels of yester-year?
To those who were young when Sully-Prudhomme entered into his
immortality it seems impossible to realise that the glory has already
departed. Gaston Paris celebrated "the penetrating sincerity and the
exquisite expression of feeling" which distinguished Sully-Prudhomme
above all other poets. He was the bard of the inner life, sincere and
dignified, full of melancholy reverie. A great critic compared _La Vote
Lactic_ and _Les Stalactites_ with the far-off sound of bells heard down
some lovely valley in a golden afternoon. Yet the images and the
language were precise; Sully-Prudhomme was a mathematician, and if he
was reproached with anything like a fault, it was that his style was
slightly geometrical. It would be otiose to collect any more tributes to
his genius, as it appeared to all Frenchmen, cultivated or
semi-cultivated, about the year 1880. With an analysis of
Sully-Prudhomme's poetry I am not here concerned, but with the question
of why it is that such an authority as Rémy de Gourmont could, in 1907,
without awakening any protest among persons under fifty say that it was
a "sort of social crime" to impose such balderdash as the verse of
Sully-Prudhomme on the public.
It is not needful to quote other living critics, who may think such
prolongation of their severities ungraceful. But a single contrast will
suffice. When, in 1881, Sully-Prudhomme was elected to the French
Academy, expert opinion throughout the Press was unanimous in admitting
that this was an honour deservedly given to the best lyric poet of the
age. In 1906, when a literary journal sent out this question, "Who is
the poet you love best?" and was answered by more than two hundred
writers of verse, the diversity of opinion was indeed excessive; such
poets as Sainte-Beuve, as Brizeux, as Rodenbach, received votes, all the
great masters received many. But Sully-Prudhomme, alone, received not
one vote. A new generation had arisen, and one of its leaders, with
cruel wit, transferred to the reputation of the author his own most
famous line:--"N'y touchez pas, il est brisé."
It is necessary to recollect that we are not dealing with the phenomenon
of the inability of very astute literary people to recognise at once a
startling new sort of beauty. When Robert Browning lent the best poems
of Keats to Mrs. Carlyle, she read them and returned them with the
remark that "almost any young gentleman with a sweet tooth might be
expected to write such things." Mrs. Carlyle was a very clever woman,
but she was not quite "educated up to" Keats. The history of letters is
full of these grotesque limitations of taste, in the presence of great
art which has not yet been "classed." But we are here considering the
much stranger and indeed extremely disconcerting case of a product which
has been accepted, with acclamation, by the judges of one generation,
and is contemptuously hooted out of court by the next. It is not, on
this occasion, Sully-Prudhomme whom we are considering, but his critics.
If Théophile Gautier was right in 1867, Rémy de Gourmont must have been
wrong in 1907; yet they both were honourable men in the world of
criticism. Nor is it merely the dictum of a single man, which, however
ingenious, may be paradoxical. It is worse than that; it is the fact
that one whole generation seems to have agreed with Gautier, and that
another whole generation is of the same mind as Rémy de Gourmont.
Then it is that Mr. Balfour, like Galuppi with his "cold music," comes
in and tells us that this is precisely what we have to expect. All
beauty consists in the possession of certain relations, which being
withdrawn, beauty disappears from the object that seemed to possess it.
There is no permanent element in poetic excellence. We are not to demand
any settled opinion about poetry. So Mr. Balfour seems to creak it, and
we want the heart to scold. But is it quite so certain that there is no
fixed norm of beauty imaginable? Is it the fact that poetic pleasure
cannot "be supposed to last any longer than the transient reaction
between it" and the temporary prejudice of our senses? If this be true,
then are critics of all men most miserable.
Yet, deeply dejected as it leaves me to know that very clever people
despise the "genteel third-rate mind" of Wordsworth, I am not quite
certain that I yield to Mr. Balfour's brilliant and paralysing logic.
That eminent philosopher seems to say "you find the poets, whom you
revered in your youth, treated with contempt in your old age. Well! It
is very sad, and perhaps it would annoy me too, if I were not a
philosopher. But it only shows how right I was to tell, you not to
expect permanent relations behind the feeling of beauty, since all is
illusion, and there is no such thing as a principle of taste, but only
a variation of fashion."
Is it, however, quite so certain, after all, that there is no standard?
It must be admitted that there seems to be no fixed rule of taste, not
even a uniformity of practice or general tendency to agreement in
particular cases. But the whole study of the fine arts would lead to
despair if we allowed ourselves to accept this admission as implying
that no conceivable principle of taste exists. We may not be able to
produce it, like a yard-measure, and submit works of imagination to it,
once and for all, in the eyes of a consternated public. But when we
observe, as we must allow, that art is no better at one age than at
another, but only different; that it is subject to modification, but
certainly not to development; may we not safely accept this stationary
quality as a proof that there does exist, out of sight, unattained and
unattainable, a positive norm of poetic beauty? We cannot define it, but
in each generation all excellence must be the result of a relation to
it. It is the moon, heavily wrapt up in clouds, and impossible exactly
to locate, yet revealed by the light it throws on distant portions of
the sky. At all events, it appears to me that this is the only theory by
which we can justify a continued interest in literature when it is
attacked, now on one side, now on another, by the vicissitudes of
fashion.
The essays which are here collected deal, for the most part, with
figures in the history of English literature which have suffered from
the changes of fortune and the instability of taste. In every case,
there has been something which is calculated to attract the sympathy and
interest of one who, like myself, has been closely concerned with two
distinct but not unrelated branches of his subject, the literary
character and the literary craft. More than fifty years have
passed--like a cloud, like a dream!--since I first saw my name printed
below a passage of critical opinion. How many reputations, within that
half-century, have not been exalted, how many have not been depressed!
We have seen Tennyson advanced beyond Virgil and Victor Hugo beyond
Homer. We have seen the latest freak of futurism preferred to _The Lotus
Eaters_, and the first _Légende des Siècles_ rejected as unreadable. In
face of this whirlwind of doctrine the public ceases to know whether it
is on its head or its feet--"its trembling tent all topsy-turvy wheels,"
as an Elizabethan has it. To me it seems that security can only be found
in an incessant exploration of the by-ways of literary history and
analysis of the vagaries of literary character. To pursue this analysis
and this exploration without bewilderment and without prejudice is to
sum up the pleasures of a life devoted to books.
_August 1919._
Three hundred years have gone by to-day since Sir Walter Raleigh was
beheaded, in presence of a vast throng of spectators, on the scaffold of
Old Palace Yard in Westminster. General Gordon said that England is what
her adventurers have made her, and there is not in all English history a
more shining and violent specimen of the adventurous type than Raleigh.
I am desired to deliver a brief panegyric on this celebrated freebooter,
and I go behind the modern definition of the word "panegyric" (as a
pompous and ornamented piece of rhetoric) to its original significance,
which was, as I take it, the reminder, to a great assembly of persons,
of the reason why they have been brought together in the name of a man
long dead. Therefore I shall endeavour, in the short space of time
allotted to me, not so much to eulogise as to explain and to define what
Sir Walter Raleigh was and represents.
I suggest, therefore, before we touch upon any of the details of his
career and character, that the central feature of Raleigh, as he appears
to us after three hundred years, is his unflinching determination to see
the name of England written across the forehead of the world. Others
before him had been patriots of the purest order, but Raleigh was the
first man who laid it down, as a formula, that "England shall by the
favour of God resist, repel and confound all whatsoever attempts
against her sacred kingdom." He had no political sense nor skill in
statecraft. For that we go to the Burghleys or the Cecils, crafty men of
experience and judgment. But he understood that England had enemies and
that those enemies must be humbled and confounded. He understood that
the road of England's greatness, which was more to him than all other
good things, lay across the sea. The time was ripe for the assertion of
English liberty, of English ascendancy, too; and the opportunity of the
moment lay in "those happy hands which the Holy Ghost hath guided," the
fortunate adventurers. Of these Raleigh was the most eminent as he was
also, in a sense, the most unfortunate.
A heavy shadow lay all over the Western world, the shadow of a fierce
bird of prey hovering over its victim. Ever since Ferdinand expelled the
Moors out of Granada, Spain had been nursing insensate dreams of
universal empire. She was endeavouring to destroy the infant system of
European civilisation by every means of brutality and intrigue which the
activity of her arrogance could devise. The Kings of Spain, in their
ruthless ambition, encouraged their people in a dream of Spanish
world-dominion. Their bulletins had long "filled the earth with their
vainglorious vaunts, making great appearance of victories"; they had
spread their propaganda "in sundry languages in print," distributing
braggart pamphlets in which they boasted, for the benefit of neutrals,
of their successes against England, France, and Italy. They had "abused
and tormented" the wretched inhabitants of the Low Countries, and they
held that the force of arms which they brandished would weigh against
justice, humanity, and freedom in the servitude which they meant to
inflict upon Europe. It was to be _Spanien über alles_.
But there was one particular nation against which the malignity of the
great enemy blazed most fiercely. The King of Spain blasphemously
regarded himself as the instrument of God, and there was one country
which more than the rest frustrated his pious designs. This was England,
and for that reason England was more bitterly hated than any other
enemy. The Spaniards did "more greedily thirst after English blood than
after the lives of any other people of Europe." The avowed purpose of
Castile was to destroy that maritime supremacy of England on which the
very existence of the English State depends. The significance of Sir
Walter Raleigh consists in the clairvoyance with which he perceived and
the energy with which he combated this monstrous assumption. Other noble
Englishmen of his time, and before his time, had been clear-sighted and
had struck hard against the evil tyranny of Spanish dynastic militarism,
but no other man before or since was so luminously identified with
resistance. He struts upon the stage of battle with the limelight full
upon him. The classic writing of the crisis is contained in the _Last
Fight of the Revenge at Sea_ of 1591, where the splendid defiance and
warning of the Preface are like trumpets blown to the four quarters of
the globe. Raleigh stands out as the man who above all others laboured,
as he said, "against the ambitious and bloody pretences of the
Spaniards, who, seeking to devour all nations, shall be themselves
devoured."
There is a blessing upon the meek of the earth, but I do not present
Raleigh to you as a humble-minded man. In that wonderful Elizabethan age
there were blossoming, side by side, the meekness of Hooker, the
subtlety of Bacon, the platonic dream of Spenser, the imperturbable
wisdom of Shakespeare. Raleigh had no part in any of these, and to
complain of that would be to grumble because a hollyhock is neither a
violet nor a rose. He had his enemies during his life and his detractors
ever since, and we may go so far as to admit that he deserves them. He
was a typical man of that heroic age in that he possessed, even to
excess, all its tropic irregularity of ethics. He lived in a perpetual
alternation of thunderstorm and blazing sunshine. He admitted himself
that his "reason," by which he meant his judgment, "was exceeding weak,"
and his tactlessness constantly precluded a due appreciation of his
courage and nobility. For long years his violent and haughty temper made
him the most unpopular man in England, except in Devonshire, where
everybody doted on him. He was "a man of desperate fortunes," and he did
not shrink from violent methods. In studying his life we are amused, we
are almost scandalised, at his snake-like quality. He moves with
serpentine undulations, and the beautiful hard head is lifted from
ambush to strike the unsuspecting enemy at sight. With his
protestations, his volubility, his torrent of excuses, his evasive
pertinacity, Sir Walter Raleigh is the very opposite of the "strong
silent" type of soldier which the nineteenth century invented for
exclusive British consumption.
In judging his character we must take into consideration not only the
times in which he lived, but the leaders of English policy with whom he
came into collision. He was not thirty years of age, and still at the
height of his vivacity, when he was taken into the close favour of Queen
Elizabeth. There can be no question that he found in the temper of the
monarch something to which his own nature intimately responded. The
Queen was an adventurer at heart, as he was, and she was an Englishman
of Englishmen. We are accustomed to laugh at the extravagance of the
homage which Raleigh paid to a woman old enough to be his mother, at the
bravado which made him fling his new plush cloak across a puddle for the
Queen to tread over gently, as Fuller tells us, "rewarding him
afterwards with many suits for his so free and seasonable tender of so
fair a footcloth," or at the story of the rhymes the couple cut on the
glass with their diamond rings. In all this, no doubt, there was the
fashion of the time, and on Raleigh's part there was ambition and the
desire to push his fortunes without scruple. But there was, you may be
sure, more than that; there was the instinctive sympathy between the two
who hated with the most unflagging and the most burning hate the wicked
aggression of Spain. We may be sure that Elizabeth never for a day
forgot that Pope Alexander VI. had generously bestowed the Western world
on the Crown of Spain. Raleigh spoke a language which might be
extravagant and which might be exasperating, which might, in fact, lead
to outrageous quarrels between his Cynthia and himself, but which, at
least, that Cynthia understood.
But in 1602, when Raleigh was fifty years of age and had his splendours
behind him, there came another Pharaoh who knew not Joseph. James I. was
the type of the cautious man who only looks to the present, who hopes by
staving off a crisis till Tuesday that something fresh will "turn up" by
Wednesday. He was disposed, from the very first, to distrust and to
waylay the plans of Raleigh. We are told, and can well believe it, that
he was "diffident" of Sir Walter's designs. He was uncomfortable in the
presence of that breezy "man of desperate fortunes." A very excellent
example of the opposition of the two types is offered by the discussion
about the golden city of Manoa. Raleigh believed, and after all
disappointments continued to be sure, that in the heart of the swamps of
the Orinoco there existed a citadel of magnificent wealth, an emporium
of diamonds and gold, from which Spain was secretly drawing the riches
with which she proposed to overwhelm civilisation. He struggled for
nearly a quarter of a century to win this marvellous city for England.
James I. chopped in with his cold logic, and declined to believe that
any golden mine existed in Guiana "anywhere in nature," as he craftily
said. When Raleigh returned after his last miserable failure in May
seas. Of course, the King was right; there was no mine of diamonds, no
golden city. But the immense treasures that haunted Raleigh's dreams
were more real than reality; they existed in the future; he looked far
ahead, and our sympathies to-day, and our gratitude also, are all for
the noble and valorous knight who sailed out into the West searching for
an unknown El Dorado.
It is not so easy to defend the character of our hero against those who,
like Hume, have objected to his methods in the prosecution of his
designs. To Hume, as to many others before and since, Raleigh seemed
"extremely defective either in solid understanding, or morals, or both."
The excellent historians of the eighteenth century could not make up
their minds whether he was a hero or an impostor. Did he believe in the
Guiana mine, or was he, through all those strenuous years, hoodwinking
the world? Had he any purpose, save to plunder the Spaniard? Perhaps his
own family doubted his sanity, for his son Walter, when he charged the
Spanish settlement at San Thomé, pointed to the house of the little
colony and shouted to his men: "Come on, this is the true mine, and none
but fools would look for any other!" Accusations of bad faith, of
factious behaviour, of disloyal intrigue, were brought up against Sir
Walter over and over again during the "day of his tempestuous life,
drawn on into an evening" of ignominy and blood. These charges were the
"inmost and soul-piercing wounds" of which he spoke, still "aching,"
still "uncured."
There is no need to recount to you the incidents of his life, but I may
remind you that after the failure of the latest expedition to South
America the Privy Council, under pressure from the Spanish Ambassador,
gave orders to Sir Lewis Stukeley to bring the body of Sir Walter
Raleigh speedily to London. This was the culmination of his fall, since,
three days after Raleigh landed at Plymouth, the King had assured Spain
that "not all those who have given security for Raleigh can save him
from the gallows." His examination followed, and the publication of the
_Apology for the Voyage to Guiana_. The trial dragged on, while James
I., in a manner almost inconceivable, allowed himself to be hurried and
bullied by the insolent tyrant Philip II. If the English King did not
make haste to execute Raleigh the Spaniards would fetch him away and
hang him in Madrid. In these conditions, and clutching at life as a man
clutches at roots and branches when he is sliding down a precipice, the
conduct of Raleigh has given cause to his critics to blaspheme. He
wriggled like an eel, he pretended to be sick, he pretended to be mad,
in order to protract his examination. He prevaricated about his mine,
about the French alliance, about the Spanish treaties, about his stores
and instruments. Did he believe, or did he not believe, in the Empire of
the Inca, in the Amazons or Republic of Women, in the gold lying hidden
in the hard white spar of El Dorado? We do not know, and his own latest
efforts at explanation only cloud our counsel. He was perhaps really a
little mad at last, his feverish brain half-crazed by the movement on
land and sea of the triumphant wealth of Spain.
Let us never overlook that the master-passion of his whole career was
hatred of this tyrannous prosperity of England's most formidable rival.
He acted impulsively, and even unjustly; there was much in his methods
that a cool judgment must condemn; but he was fighting, with his back to
the wall, in order that the British race should not be crowded out of
existence by "the proud Iberian." He saw that if Spain were permitted to
extend her military and commercial supremacy unchecked, there would be
an end to civilisation. Democracy was a thing as yet undeveloped, but
the seeds of it were lying in the warm soil of English liberty, and
Raleigh perceived, more vehemently than any other living man, that the
complete victory of Spain would involve the shipwreck of England's hopes
of future prosperity. Nor was he exclusively interested in England,
though all his best hopes were ours. When he had been a lad at Oxford he
had broken away from his studies in 1569 to help the Protestant princes
as a gentleman volunteer in France, and he took part in the famous
battle of Jarnac. He is supposed to have fought in France for six years.
From early youth his mind was "bent on military glory," and always in
opposition to Spain. His escape from the bloody Vespers of Saint
Bartholomew had given him a deep distrust of the policy of Rome. The
Spaniard had "abused and tormented" the wretched inhabitants of
Flanders. Sir Walter Raleigh dreamed that by the combination in arms of
England, France, and the Low Countries, the Spaniards "might not only be
persuaded to live in peace, but all their swelling and overflowing
streams might be brought back into their natural channels and old
banks."
Raleigh stood out, as he put it himself, against "the continuance of
this boundless ambition in mortal men." The rulers in Madrid,
transported by their own arrogance, had determined to impose their
religion, their culture, their form of government, on the world. It was
a question whether the vastly superior moral and intellectual energy of
England and France would not be crushed beneath the heel of Spain.
Raleigh was ready to sacrifice everything, to imperil his own soul, to
prevent that. He says you might as well "root out the Christian religion
altogether" as join "the rest of all Europe to Spain." In his zeal to
prevent "the continuance of this boundless ambition in mortal men," he
lent himself to acts which we must not attempt to condone. There is no
use in trying to explain away the facts of his cruel and even savage
fanaticism in Ireland when he was governor of Munster. He was always apt
to be abruptly brutal to a man who crossed his path. But even his Irish
career offers aspects on which we may dwell with pure pleasure. Nothing
could be more romantic than those adventures, like the feats of a
paladin of the Faerie Queen, which he encountered in the great wood of
Lismore; while the story of how he carried off Lord and Lady Roche from
their breakfast-table in their own castle of Ballyinharsh, and how he
rode with them up ravines and round precipices in that mad flight from
their retainers, is as rousing as any scene ever imagined by Dumas
_père_.
Raleigh called himself the Shepherd of the Ocean, and the name fits him
well, even though his flock were less like sheep than like a leash of
hunting leopards. His theory was that with a pack of small and active
pinnaces he could successfully hunt the lumbering Spanish galleons
without their being able to hit back. He was, in contradistinction to
many preceding English admirals, a cautious fighter at sea, and he says,
in a striking passage of the _History of the World_, written towards the
end of his career, "to clap ships together without any consideration
belongs rather to a madman than to a man of war." He must have taken the
keenest interest in the gigantic failure of the Felicissima Armada in
the other hand, the two finest of his prose pamphlets, the _Relation of
the Action in Cadiz Harbour_ and the incomparable _Report on the Fight
in the Revenge_, supply us with ample materials for forming an idea of
his value as a naval strategist. Raleigh's earliest biographer, Oldys
the antiquary, speaks of him as "raising a grove of laurels out of the
sea," and it is certainly upon that element that he reaches his highest
effect of prominence. It was at sea that he could give fullest scope to
his hatred of the tyrannous prosperity of Spain. He had to be at once a
gamekeeper and a poacher; he had to protect the legitimate interests of
English shipping against privateers and pirates, while he was persuaded
to be, or felt himself called upon to become, no little of a pirate
himself. He was a passionate advocate of the freedom of the seas, and
those who look upon Raleigh as a mere hot-brained enthusiast should read
his little book called _Observations on Trade and Commerce_, written in
the Tower, and see what sensible views he had about the causes of the
depression of trade. These sage opinions did not check him, or his
fleets of hunting-pinnaces, from lying in wait for the heavy wallowing
plate-ships, laden with Indian carpets and rubies and sandalwood and
ebony, which came swinging up to the equator from Ceylon or Malabar. The
"freedom of the seas" was for Raleigh's ship, the _Roebuck_; it was by
no means for the _Madre de Dios_. We find these moral inconsistencies in
the mind of the best of adventurers.
A sketch of Raleigh's character would be imperfect indeed if it
contained no word concerning his genius as a coloniser. One of his main
determinations, early in life, was "to discover and conquer unknown
lands, and take possession of them in the Queen's name." We celebrate in
Sir Walter Raleigh one of the most intelligent and imaginative of the
founders of our colonial empire. The English merchantmen before his time
had been satisfied with the determination to grasp the wealth of the New
World as it came home to Spain; it had not occurred to them to compete
with the great rival at the fountain-head of riches. Even men like Drake
and Frobisher had been content with a policy of forbidding Spain, as the
poet Wither said, "to check our ships from sailing where they please."
South America was already mainly in Spanish hands, but North America was
still open to invasion. It was Raleigh's half-brother, Sir Humphrey
Gilbert, who first thought of planting an English settlement in what is
now the United States, in 1578. But Gilbert had "no luck at sea," as
Queen Elizabeth observed, and it was Raleigh who, in 1584, took up the
scheme of colonisation. He did not drop it until the death of Elizabeth,
when, under the east wind of the new _régime_, the blossom of his
colonial enterprises flagged.
The motion for the ceremony of to-day originated with the authorities of
an important American city, which proudly bears the name of our
adventurer. The earliest settlement in what are now the United States
was made at Roanoke, in Virginia, on a day which must always be
prominent in the annals of civilisation, August 17th, 1585. But this
colony lasted only ten months, and it was not until nearly two years
later that the fourth expedition which Raleigh sent out succeeded in
maintaining a perilous foothold in the new country. This was the little
trembling taper to which his own name was given, the twinkling spark
which is now the flourishing city of Raleigh in North Carolina. We may
well marvel at the pertinacity with which Sir Walter persisted, in the
face of innumerable difficulties, in sending out one colonising fleet
after another, although, contrary to common legend, he himself never set
foot in North America. It was fortunate that at this period of his
career he was wealthy, for the attempts to plant settlements in the vast
region which he named Virginia cost him more than £40,000. We note at
all turns of his fortune his extraordinary tenacity of purpose, which he
illustrated, as though by a motto, in the verses he addressed to a
comrade towards the end of his imprisonment in the Tower:--
"Change not! to change thy fortune 'tis too late;
Who with a manly faith resolves to die
May promise to himself a lasting State,
Though not so great, yet free from infamy."
So we may think of him in his prime, as he stood on the Hoe of Plymouth
twenty years before, a gallant figure of a man, bedizened with precious
stones, velvets, and embroidered damasks, shouting his commands to his
captains in a strong Devonshire accent. We think of him resolutely
gazing westward always, with the light of the sea in his eyes.
We come to the final scene which we are here to-day to commemorate.
Little honour to the rulers of England in 1618 redounds from it, and yet
we may feel that it completed and even redeemed from decay the character
of Raleigh. This tragedy, which was almost a murder, was needed to round
off the accomplishment of so strange and frantic a career of romantic
violence, and to stamp it with meaning. If Raleigh had been thrown from
his horse or had died of the ague in his bed, we should have been
depressed by the squalid circumstances, we should have been less
conscious than we are now of his unbroken magnanimity. His failures and
his excesses had made him unpopular throughout England, and he was both
proud and peevish in his recognition of the fact. He declared that he
was "nothing indebted" to the world, and again that, "the common people
are evil judges of honest things." But the thirteen years of his
imprisonment caused a reaction. People forgot how troublesome he had
been and only recollected his magnificence. They remembered nothing but
that he had spent his whole energy and fortune in resisting the
brutality and avarice of the Spaniard.
Then came the disgraceful scene of his cross-examination at Westminster,
and the condemnation by his venal judges at the order of a paltry king.
It became known, or shrewdly guessed, that Spain had sent to James I. a
hectoring alternative that Raleigh must be executed in London or sent
alive for a like purpose to Madrid. The trial was a cowardly and
ignominious submission of the English Government to the insolence of
England's hereditary enemy. Raleigh seemed for the moment to have failed
completely, yet it was really like the act of Samson, who slew more men
at his death than in all his life. Samuel Pepys, who had some fine
intuitions at a time when the national _moral_ was very low, spoke of
Raleigh as being "given over, as a sacrifice," to our enemies. This has
been, in truth, the secret of his unfailing romantic popularity, and it
is the reason of the emotion which has called us together here three
hundred years after his death upon the scaffold.
Among the "co-supremes and stars of love" which form the constellated
glory of our greatest poet there is one small splendour which we are apt
to overlook in our general survey. But, if we isolate it from other
considerations, it is surely no small thing that Shakespeare created and
introduced into our literature the Dramatic Song. If with statistical
finger we turn the pages of all his plays, we shall discover, not
perhaps without surprise, that these contain not fewer than fifty
strains of lyrical measure. Some of the fifty, to be sure, are mere
star-dust, but others include some of the very jewels of our tongue.
They range in form from the sophisticated quatorzains of _The Two
Gentlemen of Verona_ (where, however, comes "Who is Silvia?") to the
reckless snatches of melody in _Hamlet_. But all have a character which
is Shakespearean, and this regardless of the question so often raised,
and so incapable of reply, as to whether some of the wilder ones are
Shakespeare's composition or no. Whoever originally may have written
such scraps as "They bore him bare-faced on the bier" and "Come o'er the
bourne, Bessy, to me," the spirit of Shakespeare now pervades and
possesses them.
Our poet was a prodigious innovator in this as in so many other matters.
Of course, the idea and practice of musical interludes in plays was not
quite novel. In Shakespeare's early youth that remarkable artist in
language, John Lyly, had presented songs in several of his plays, and
these were notable for what his contemporary, Henry Upchear, called
"their labouring beauty." We may notice that Lyly's songs were not
printed till long after Shakespeare's death, but doubtless he had
listened to them. Peele and Greene had brilliant lyrical gifts, but they
did not exercise them in their dramas, nor did Lodge, whose novel of
Rosalynde (1590) contains the only two precedent songs which we could
willingly add to Shakespeare's juvenile repertory. But while I think it
would be rash to deny that the lyrics of Lodge and Lyly had their direct
influence on the style of Shakespeare, neither of those admirable
precursors conceived the possibility of making the Song an integral part
of the development of the drama. This was Shakespeare's invention, and
he applied it with a technical adroitness which had never been dreamed
of before and was never rivalled after.
This was not apprehended by the early critics of our divine poet, and
has never yet, perhaps, received all the attention it deserves. We may
find ourselves bewildered if we glance at what the eighteenth-century
commentators said, for instance, about the songs in _Twelfth Night_.
They called the adorable rhapsodies of the Clown "absurd" and
"unintelligible"; "O Mistress mine" was in their ears "meaningless";
"When that I was" appeared to them "degraded buffoonery." They did not
perceive the close and indispensable connection between the Clown's song
and the action of the piece, although the poet had been careful to point
out that it was a moral song "dulcet in contagion," and too good, except
for sarcasm, to be wasted on Sir Andrew and Sir Toby. The critics
neglected to note what the Duke says about "Come away, come away,
Death," and they prattled in their blindness as to whether this must not
really have been sung by Viola, all the while insensible to the poignant
dramatic value of it as warbled by the ironic Clown in the presence of
the blinded pair. But indeed the whole of _Twelfth Night_ is burdened
with melody; behind every garden-door a lute is tinkling, and at each
change of scene some unseen hand is overheard touching a harp-string.
The lovely, infatuated lyrics arrive, dramatically, to relieve this
musical tension at its height.
Rather different, and perhaps still more subtle, is the case of _A
Winter's Tale_, where the musical obsession is less prominent, and where
the songs are all delivered from the fantastic lips of Autolycus. Here
again the old critics were very wonderful. Dr. Burney puts "When
daffodils begin to peer" and "Lawn as white as driven snow" into one
bag, and flings it upon the dust-heap, as "two nonsensical songs" sung
by "a pickpocket." Dr. Warburton blushed to think that such "nonsense"
could be foisted on Shakespeare's text. Strange that those learned men
were unable to see, not merely that the rogue-songs are intensely human
and pointedly Shakespearean, but that they are an integral part of the
drama. They complete the revelation of the complex temperament of
Autolycus, with his passion for flowers and millinery, his hysterical
balancing between laughter and tears, his impish mendacity, his sudden
sentimentality, like the Clown's
"Not a friend, not a friend greet
My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown!"
It is in these subtle lyrical amalgams of humour and tenderness that the
firm hand of the creator of character reveals itself.
But it is in _The Tempest_ that Shakespeare's supremacy as a writer of
songs is most brilliantly developed. Here are seven or eight lyrics, and
among them are some of the loveliest things that any man has written.
What was ever composed more liquid, more elastic, more delicately
fairy-like than Ariel's First Song?
"Come unto these yellow sands,
And then take hands:
Curtsied when you have, and kiss'd,--
The wild waves whist."
That is, not "kissed the wild waves," as ingenious punctuators pretend,
but, parenthetically, "kissed one another,--the wild waves being silent
the while." Even fairies do not kiss waves, than which no embrace could
be conceived less rewarding. Has any one remarked the echo of Marlowe
here, from _Hero and Leander_,
"when all is whist and still,
Save that the sea playing on yellow sand
Sends forth a rattling murmur to the land!"
But Marlowe, with all his gifts, could never have written the lyrical
parts of _The Tempest_. This song is in emotional sympathy with
Ferdinand, and in the truest sense dramatic, not a piece of pretty verse
foisted in to add to the entertainment.
Ariel's Second Song has been compared with Webster's "Call for the robin
redbreast" in _The White Devil_, but solemn as Webster's dirge is, it
tolls, it docs not sing to us. Shakespeare's "ditty," as Ferdinand calls
it, is like a breath of the west wind over an æolian harp. Where, in any
language, has ease of metre triumphed more adorably than in Ariel's
Fourth Song,--"Where the bee sucks"? Dowden saw in Ariel the imaginative
genius of English poetry, recently delivered from Sycorax. If we glance
at Dry den's recension of _The Tempest_ we may be inclined to think that
the "wicked dam" soon won back her mastery. With all respect to Dryden,
what are we to think of his discretion in eking out Shakespeare's
insufficiencies with such staves as this:--
"Upon the floods we'll sing and play
And celebrate a halcyon day;
Great Nephew Aeolus make no noise,
Muzzle your roaring boys."
and so forth? What had happened to the ear of England in seventy years?
As a matter of fact the perfection of dramatic song scarcely survived
Shakespeare himself. The early Jacobeans, Heywood, Ford, and Dekker in
particular, broke out occasionally in delicate ditties. But most
playwrights, like Massinger, were persistently pedestrian. The only man
who came at all close to Shakespeare as a lyrist was John Fletcher,
whose "Lay a garland on my hearse" nobody could challenge if it were
found printed first in a Shakespeare quarto. The three great songs in
"Valentinian" have almost more splendour than any of Shakespeare's,
though never quite the intimate beauty, the singing spontaneity of
"Under the greenwood tree" or "Hark, hark, the lark." It has grown to be
the habit of anthologists to assert Shakespeare's right to "Roses, their
sharp spikes being gone." The mere fact of its loveliness and perfection
gives them no authority to do so; and to my ear the rather stately
procession of syllables is reminiscent of Fletcher. We shall never be
certain; and who would not swear that "Hear, ye ladies that are coy" was
by the same hand that wrote "Sigh no more, ladies," if we were not sure
of the contrary? But the most effective test, even in the case of
Fletcher, is to see whether the trill of song is, or is not, an inherent
portion of the dramatic structure of the play. This is the hall-mark of
Shakespeare, and perhaps of him alone.
The practically complete absence of the Woman of Letters from our
tropical and profuse literature of the early and middle seventeenth
century has often been observed with wonder. While France had her
Madeleine de Scudéry and her Mlle. de Gournay and her Mère Angelique
Arnauld, Englishwomen of the Stuart age ventured upon no incursions into
philosophy, fiction, or theology. More and more eagerly, however, they
read books; and as a consequence of reading, they began at last to
write. The precious Margaret, Duchess of Newcastle, hob-a-nobbed with
every Muse in her amazing divagations. But the earliest professional
woman of letters was Aphra Behn, the novelist and playwright, to whose
genius justice has only quite lately been done by Mr. Montague Summers.
Mrs. Behn died in 1689, and it seemed at first that she had left no
heritage to her sex. But there presently appeared a set of female
writers, who enlivened the last years of the century, but who were soon
eclipsed by the wits of the age of Anne, and who have been entirely
forgotten. It is to the most interesting of these "transient phantoms"
that I wish to draw attention.
The extreme precocity of Catharine Trotter makes her seem to belong to
the age of Dryden, but she was in reality younger than Addison and most
of the other contemporaries of Pope. She was born on August 16th, 1679,
the younger daughter of a naval officer, Captain David Trotter, R.N.;
her mother's maiden name had been Sarah Ballenden, probably of the
well-known Catholic family of that ilk. She "had the honour of being
nearly related to the illustrious families of Maitland, Duke of
Lauderdale and Drummond, Earl of Perth." The Jacobite fourth Earl of
Perth seems to have been the patron of Captain Trotter, of whom he wrote
in 1684 that he was "an ornament to his country." Apparently the gallant
captain was attached to Trinity House, where his probity and integrity
earned him the epithet of "honest David," and where he attracted the
notice of George, first Lord Dartmouth, when that rising statesman was
appointed Master. Captain Trotter had served the Crown from his youth,
"with great gallantry and fidelity, both by land and sea," and had been
very successful in the Dutch wars. He had a brother who was a commander
in the Navy. We get an impression of high respectability in the outer,
but not outermost, circles of influential Scottish society. Doubtless
the infancy of Catharine was spent in conditions of dependent
prosperity. These conditions were not to last. When she was four years
old Lord Dartmouth started on the famous expedition to demolish Tangier,
and he took Captain Trotter with him as his commodore. In this affair,
as before, the captain distinguished himself by his ability, and instead
of returning to London after Tangier he was recommended to King Charles
II. as the proper person to convoy the fleet of the Turkey Company to
its destination. Apparently it was understood that this would be the
final reward of his services and that he was to "make his fortune" out
of the Turks. Unhappily, after convoying his charge safely to
Scanderoon, he fell sick of the plague that was raging there, and died,
in the course of January 1684, in company with all the other officers of
his ship. Every misfortune now ensued; the purser, who was thus left to
his own devices, helped himself to the money destined for the expenses
of the voyage, while, to crown all, the London goldsmith in whose hands
the captain had left his private fortune took this occasion to go
bankrupt. The King, in these melancholy circumstances, granted an
Admiralty pension to the widow, but when he died early in the following
year this was no longer paid, and the unfortunate ladies of the Trotter
family might well murmur:--
"One mischief brings another on his neck,
As mighty billows tumble in the seas."
From the beginning of her fifth year, then, Catharine experienced the
precarious lot of those who depend for a livelihood on the charity of
more or less distant relatives. We dimly see a presentable mother
piteously gathering up such crumbs as fell from the tables of the
illustrious families with whom she was remotely connected. But the Duke
of Lauderdale himself was now dead, and the Earl of Perth had passed the
zenith of his power. No doubt in the seventeenth century the protection
of poor relations was carried on more systematically than it is to-day,
and certainly Mrs. Trotter contrived to live and to bring up her two
daughters genteelly. The first years were the worst; the accession of
William III. brought back to England and to favour Gilbert Burnet, who
became Bishop of Salisbury in 1688, when Catharine was nine years old.
Mrs. Trotter found a patron and perhaps an employer in the Bishop, and
when Queen Anne came to the throne her little pension was renewed.
There is frequent reference to money in Catharine Trotter's writings,
and the lack of it was the rock upon which her gifts were finally
wrecked. With a competency she might have achieved a much more prominent
place in English literature than she could ever afford to reach. She
offers a curious instance of the depressing effect of poverty, and we
get the impression that she was never, during her long and virtuous
career, lifted above the carking anxiety which deadens the imagination.
As a child, however, she seems to have awakened hopes of a high order.
She was a prodigy, and while little more than an infant she displayed an
illumination in literature which was looked upon, in that age of female
darkness, as quite a portent. She taught herself French, "by her own
application without any instructor," but was obliged to accept some
assistance in acquiring Latin and logic. The last-mentioned subject
became her particular delight, and at a very tender age she drew up "an
abstract" of that science "for her own use." Thus she prepared for her
future communion with Locke and with Leibnitz. When she was very small,
in spite of frequent conferences with learned members of the Church of
England, she became persuaded of the truth of Catholicism and joined the
Roman communion. We may conjecture that this coincided with the
conversion of her kinsman, Lord Chancellor Perth, but as events turned
out it cannot but have added to the sorrows of that much-tried woman,
her mother. (It should be stated that Catharine resumed the Anglican
faith when she was twenty-eight years of age.)
She was in her tenth year when the unhappy reign of James II. came to a
close. Mrs. Trotter's connections were now in a poor plight. The new
Earl of Lauderdale was in great distress for money; Lord Dartmouth,
abandoned by the King in his flight, was thrown into the Tower, where he
died on October 25th, 1691, in which year the estates of the Earl of
Perth were sequestered and he himself hunted out of the country. Ruin
simultaneously fell on all the fine friends of our infant prodigy, and
we can but guess how it affected her. Yet there were plenty of other
Jacobites left in London, and Catharine's first public appearance shows
that she cultivated their friendship. She published in 1693 a copy of
verses addressed to Mr. Bevil Higgons on the occasion of his recovery
from the smallpox; she was then fourteen years of age. Higgons was a
young man of twenty-three, who had lately returned from the exiled court
in France, where he had distinguished himself by his agreeable manners,
and who had just made a name for himself by poems addressed to Dryden
and by a prologue to Congreve's _Old Batchelor_. He was afterwards to
become famous for a little while as a political historian. Catharine
Trotter's verses are bad, but she addresses Higgons as "lovely youth,"
and claims his gratitude for her tribute in terms which are almost
boisterous. This poem was not only her introduction to the public, but,
through Bevil Higgons, was probably the channel of her acquaintance with
Congreve and Dryden.
Throughout her life she was fond of writing letters to celebrated
people; she now certainly wrote to Congreve and doubtless to Dryden. A
freedom in correspondence ran in the family. Her poor mother is revealed
to us as always "renewing her application" to somebody or other. We next
find the youthful poet in relation with the Earl of Dorset, from whom
she must have concealed her Jacobite propensities. Dorset was the great
public patron of poetry under William III., and Catharine Trotter, aged
sixteen, having composed a tragedy, appealed to him for support. It was
very graciously granted, and _Agnes de Castro_, in five acts and in
blank verse, "written by a young lady," was produced at the Theatre
Royal in 1695, under the "protection" of Charles Earl of Dorset and
Middlesex, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household. The event caused
a considerable commotion. No woman had written for the English stage
since the death of Mrs. Behn, and curiosity was much excited. Mrs.
Verbruggen, that enchanting actress, but in male attire, recited a
clever, ranting epilogue at the close of the performance, in which she
said:--
"'tis whispered here
Our Poetess is virtuous, young and fair,"
but the secret was an open one. Wycherley, who contributed verses, knew
all about it, and so did Mrs. Manley, while Powell and Colley Cibber
were among the actors. We may be sure that little Mistress Trotter's
surprising talents were the subjects of much discussion at Will's Coffee
House, and that the question of securing her for the rival theatre was
anxiously debated at Lincoln's Inn Fields. Her success in Agnes de
Castro was the principal asset which Drury Lane had to set that season
against Congreve's splendid adventure with Love for Love.
Agnes de Castro is an immature production, and shows a juvenile
insensibility to plagiarism, since the subject and treatment are
borrowed implicitly from a French novel by Mlle. de Brillac, published
at Coimbra in the fourteenth century is that of this French lady, and is
innocent of Portuguese local colour. But, as the dramatic work of a girl
of sixteen, the play is rather extraordinary for nimble movement and
adroit theatrical arrangements. It is evident that Catharine Trotter was
well versed in the stage traditions of her own day, and we may wonder
how a highly respectable girl of sixteen found her opportunity. The
English playhouse under William III. was no place for a very young lady,
even if she wore a mask. There is a good deal of meritorious
character-drawing in Agnes de Castro. The conception of a benevolent and
tenderly forgiving Princess is well contrasted with the fierce purity of
Agnes and the infatuation of the Prince. Towards the close of the first
act there is a capital scene of exquisite confusion between this
generous and distracted trio. The opening of the third act, between
Elvira and her brother Alvaro, is not at all young-ladyish, and has some
strong turns of feeling. The end of the play, with the stabbing of the
Princess and the accusation of Agnes by Elvira, is puerile, but was
doubtless welcome to a sentimental audience. It is a bad play, but not
at all an unpromising one.
Early in 1696 _Agnes de Castro_, still anonymous, was published as a
book, and for the next five or six years we find Catharine Trotter
habitually occupied in writing for the stage. Without question she did
so professionally, though in what way dramatists at the close of the
seventeenth century lived by their pens is difficult to conjecture. A
very rare play, _The Female Wits; or, the Triumvirate of Poets_, the
authorship of which has hitherto defied conjecture, was acted at Drury
Lane after Catharine Trotter had been tempted across to Lincoln's Inn
Fields, and is evidently inspired by the intense jealousy which
smouldered between the two great houses. The success of Miss Trotter
incited two older ladies to compete with her; these were Mrs.
Delariviere Manley, who was a discarded favourite of Barbara Villiers,
and fat Mrs. Mary Pix, the stage-struck consort of a tailor. These
rather ridiculous women professed themselves followers of Catharine, and
they produced plays of their own not without some success. With her they
formed the trio of Female Wits who were mocked in the lively but, on the
whole, rather disappointing play I have just mentioned, in the course of
which it is spitefully remarked of Calista--who is Miss Trotter--that
she has "made no small struggle in the world to get into print," and is
"now in such a state of wedlock to pen and ink that it will be very
difficult" for her "to get out of it."
In acting _The Female Wits_ Mrs. Temple, who had played the Princess in
_Agnes de Castro_, took the part of Calista, and doubtless, in the
coarse fashion of those days, made up exactly like poor Catharine
Trotter, who was described as "a Lady who pretends to the learned
Languages, and assumes to herself the name of a Critic." This was a
character, however, which she would not have protested against with much
vigour, for she had now quite definitely taken up the position of a
reformer and a pioneer. She posed as the champion of women's
intellectual rights, and she was accepted as representing in active
literary work the movement which Mary Astell had recently foreshadowed
in her remarkable _Serious Proposal to Ladies_ of 1694. We turn again to
_The Female Wits_, and we find Marsilia (Mrs. Manley) describing Calista
to Mrs. Wellfed (Mrs. Fix) as "the vainest, proudest, senseless Thing!
She pretends to grammar! writes in mood and figure! does everything
methodically!" Yet when Calista appears on the stage, Mrs. Manley rushes
across to fling her arms around her and to murmur: "O charmingest Nymph
of all Apollo's Train, let me embrace thee!" Later on Calista says to
Mrs. Pix, the fat tailoress, "I cannot but remind you, Madam ... I read
Aristotle in his own language"; and of a certain tirade in a play of Ben
Jonson she insists: "I know it so well, as to have turn'd it into
Latin." Mrs. Pix admits her own ignorance of all these things; she "can
go no further than the eight parts of speech." This brings down upon her
an icy reproof from Calista: "Then I cannot but take the Freedom to say
... you impose upon the Town." We get the impression of a preciseness of
manner and purpose which must have given Catharine a certain air of
priggishness, not entirely unbecoming, perhaps, but very strange in that
loose theatre of William III.
Accordingly, in her next appearance, we find her complaining to the
Princess (afterwards Queen Anne) that she has become "the mark of ill
Nature" through recommending herself "by what the other Sex think their
peculiar Prerogative"--that is, intellectual distinction. Catharine
Trotter was still only nineteen years of age when she produced her
tragedy of _Fatal Friendship_, the published copy of which (1698) is all
begarlanded with evidences of her high moral purpose in the shape of a
succession of "applausive copies" of verses. In these we are told that
she had "checked the rage of reigning vice that had debauched the
stage." This was an allusion to the great controversy then just raised
by Jeremy Collier in his famous _Short View of the Immorality and
Profaneness of the Stage_, in which all the dramatists of the day were
violently attacked for their indecency. Catharine Trotter has the
courage to side with Collier, and the tact to do so without quarrelling
with her male colleagues. She takes the side of the decent women.
"You as your Sex's champion art come forth
To fight their quarrel and assert their worth,"
one of her admirers exclaims, and another adds:--
"You stand the first of stage-reformers too."
The young poetess aimed at reconciling the stage with virtue and at
vindicating the right of woman to assume "the tragic laurel."
This was the most brilliant moment in the public career of our
bluestocking. _Fatal Friendship_ enjoyed a success which Catharine
Trotter was not to taste again, and of all her plays it is the only one
which has ever been reprinted. It is very long and extremely
sentimental, and written in rather prosy blank verse. Contemporaries
said that it placed Miss Trotter in the forefront of British drama, in
company with Congreve and Granville "the polite," who had written a
_She-Gallants_, which was everything that Miss Trotter did not wish her
plays to be. _Fatal Friendship_ has an ingenious plot, in which the
question of money takes a prominence very unusual in tragedy. Almost
every character in the piece is in reduced circumstances. Felicia,
sister to Belgard (who is too poor to maintain her), is wooed by the
wealthy Roquelaure, although she is secretly married to Gramont, who is
also too poor to support a wife. Belgard, afraid that Gramont will make
love to Felicia (that is, to his own secret wife), persuades him--in
order that his best friend, Castalio, may be released from a debtor's
prison--bigamously to many Lamira, a wealthy widow. But Castalio is in
love with Lamira, and is driven to frenzy by Gramont's illegal marriage.
It all depends upon income in a manner comically untragical. The quarrel
between the friends in the fifth act is an effective piece of
stage-craft, but the action is spoiled by a ridiculous general butchery
at the close of all. However, the audience was charmed, and even "the
stubbornest could scarce deny their Tears."
_Fatal Friendship_ was played at the Lincoln's Inn Theatre, and no doubt
it was Congreve who brought Miss Trotter over from Drury Lane. His warm
friendship for her had unquestionably a great deal to do with her
success and with the jealousy of her rivals. A letter exists in which
the great dramatist acknowledges, in 1697, the congratulations of his
young admirer, and it breathes an eager cordiality. Congreve requested
Betterton to present him to Catharine Trotter, and his partiality for
her company is mentioned by several writers. The spiteful author of _The
Female Wits_ insinuates that Congreve made the looking-over of
Catharine's scenes "his pretence for daily visits." Another satirist, in
eyes, "together with the two she-things called Poetesses which write for
his house," half-hidden from the public in a little side-box. Farquhar,
too, seeing the celebrated writer of _Fatal Friendship_ in the theatre
on the third night of the performance of his _Love and a Bottle_, had
"his passions wrought so high" by a sight of the beautiful author that
he wrote her a letter in which he called her "one of the fairest of the
sex, and the best judge." If Catharine Trotter, as the cynosure of
delicacy, at the age of nineteen, sat through _Love and a Bottle_
without a blush, even _her_ standard of decency was not very exacting.
But in all this rough, coarse world of wit her reputation never suffered
a rebuff.
Encouraged by so much public and private attention, our young dramatist
continued to work with energy and conscientiousness. But her efforts
were forestalled by an event, or rather a condition of the national
temper, of which too little notice has been taken by literary
historians. The attacks on the stage for its indecency and blasphemy had
been flippantly met by the theatrical agents, but they had sunk deeply
into the conscience of the people. There followed with alarming
abruptness a general public repulsion against the playhouses, and to
this, early in 1699, a roughly worded Royal Proclamation gave voice.
During the whole of that year the stage was almost in abeyance, and even
Congreve, with _The Way of the World_, was unable to woo his audience
back to Lincoln's Inn. During this time of depression Catharine Trotter
composed at least two tragedies, which she was unable to get performed,
while the retirement of Congreve in a paroxysm of annoyance must have
been a very serious disadvantage to her.
On May 1st, 1700, Dryden died, and with him a dramatic age passed away.
What Miss Trotter's exact relations with the great poet had been is
uncertain; she not only celebrated his death in a long elegy, in which
she speaks on behalf of the Muses, but wrote another and more important
poem, in which she gives very sound advice to the poetical beginner, who
is to take Dryden as a model, and to be particularly careful to disdain
Settle, Durfey, and Blackmore, typical poetasters of the period. She
recommends social satire to the playwright:--
"Let the nice well-bred beau himself perceive
The most accomplished, useless thing alive;
Expose the bottle-sparks that range the town,--
Shaming themselves with follies not their own,--
But chief these foes to virgin innocence,
Who, while they make to honour vain pretence,
With all that's base and impious can dispense."
Honour to those who aim high and execute boldly!
"If Shakespeare's spirit, with transporting fire,
The animated scene throughout inspire;
If in the piercing wit of Vanbrugh drest,
Each sees his darling folly made a jest;
If Garth's and Dryden's genius, through each line,
In artful praise and well-turn'd satire shine,--
To us ascribe the immortal sacred flame."
In this dead period of the stage Catharine Trotter found a warm friend
and doubtless an efficient patron in a Lady Piers, of whom we should be
glad to know more. Sir George Piers, the husband of this lady, was an
officer of rank under the Duke of Marlborough, later to become useful to
Catharine Trotter. Meanwhile the latter returned to the Theatre Royal in
Drury Lane, where, in 1701, under the patronage of Lord Halifax--Pope's
"Bufo"--she produced her third tragedy, _The Unhappy Penitent_. The
dedication of this play to Halifax is a long and interesting essay on
the poetry of the age. The author passes Dryden, Otway, Congreve, and
Lee under examination, and finds technical blemishes in them all:--
"The inimitable Shakespeare seems alone secure on every side from
an attack. I speak not here of faults against the rules of poetry,
but against the natural Genius. He had all the images of nature
present to him, studied her thoroughly, and boldly copied all her
various features, for though he has chiefly exerted himself on the
more masculine passions, 'tis as the choice of his judgment, not
the restraint of his genius, and he has given us as a proof he
could be every way equally admirable."
Lady Piers wrote the prologue to _The Unhappy Penitent_ in verses better
turned than might have been expected. She did not stint praise to her
young friend, whom she compares to the rising sun:--
"Like him, bright Maid, Thy great perfections shine
As awful, as resplendent, as divine!...
Minerva and Diana guard your soul!"
_The Unhappy Penitent_ is not a pleasing performance: it is amorous and
violent, but yet dull. Catharine's theory was better than her practice.
Nevertheless, it seems to have been successful, for the author some time
afterwards, speaking of the town's former discouragement of her dramas,
remarks that "the taste is mended." Later in 1701 she brought out at
Drury Lane her only comedy, _Love at a Loss_, dedicated in most
enthusiastic terms to Lady Piers, to whom "I owe the greatest Blessing
of my Fate," the privilege of a share in her friendship. _Love at a
Loss_ was made up of the comic scenes introduced into an old tragedy
which the author had failed to get acted. This is not a fortunate method
of construction, and the town showed no favour to Love at a Loss. The
first and only public section of Catharine Trotter's career was now
over, and she withdrew, a wayworn veteran at the age of twenty-two, to
more elevated studies.
When _Love at a Loss_ was published the author had already left town,
and after a visit to Lady Piers in Kent she now settled at Salisbury, at
the house of a physician, Dr. Inglis, who had married her only sister.
Her growing intimacy with the family of Bishop Burnet may have had
something to do with her determination to make this city her home. She
formed a very enthusiastic friendship with the Bishop's second lady, who
was an active theologian and a very intelligent woman. Our poetess was
fascinated by Mrs. Burnet. "I have not met," she writes in 1701, "such
perfection in any of our sex." She now visited in the best Wiltshire
society. When the famous singer, John Abell, was in Salisbury, he gave a
concert at the palace, and Catharine Trotter was so enchanted that she
rode out after him six miles to Tisbury to hear him sing again at Lord
Arundell of Wardour's house. She had a great appreciation of the
Bishop's "volatile activity." It is now that the name of Locke first
occurs in her correspondence, and we gather that she came into some
personal contact with him through a member of the Bishop's
family--George Burnet of Kemney, in Aberdeenshire--probably a cousin,
with whom she now cultivated an ardent intellectual friendship. He left
England on a mission which occupied him from the middle of 1701 until
acquaintance from ripening into a warmer feeling. The romance and
tragedy of Catharine Trotter's life gather, it is plain, around this
George Burnet, who was a man of brilliant accomplishments and
interested, like herself, in philosophical studies.
These, it would appear, Catharine Trotter had never abandoned, but she
applied herself to them closely at Salisbury, where she made some
superior acquaintances. One of these was John Norris of Bemerton, whose
_Theory of an Ideal and Intelligible World_ had just made some
sensation. By the intermediary of George Burnet she came in touch with
some of the leading French writers of the moment, such as Malebranche
and Madame Dacier. There is a French poet, unnamed, who understands
English, but he is gone to Rome before he can be made to read _The Fatal
Friendship_. Meanwhile, Catharine Trotter's obsession with the ideas of
Locke was giving some anxiety to her friends. That philosopher had
published his famous _Essay on the Human Understanding_ in 1690, and it
had taken several years for the opposition to his views, and in
particular to his theological toleration, to take effect. But in 1697
there were made a number of almost simultaneous attacks on Locke's
position. The circle at Salisbury was involved in them, for one of these
was written by Norris of Bemerton, and another is attributed to a member
of the Burnet family. Catharine Trotter, who had studied Locke's later
works with enthusiastic approval, was scandalised by the attacks, and
sat down to refute them. This must have been in 1701.
Although the intellectual society of Salisbury was prominent in taking
the conservative view of Locke, our bluestocking could not refrain from
telling Mrs. Burnet what she had done, nor from showing her treatise to
that friend under vows of confidence. But Mrs. Burnet, who was impulsive
and generous, could not keep the secret; she spoke about it to the
Bishop, and then to Norris of Bemerton, and finally (in June 1702) to
Locke himself. Locke was at Oates, confined by his asthma; he was old
and suffering, but still full of benevolence and curiosity, and he was
graciously interested in his remarkable defender at Salisbury. As he
could not himself travel, he sent his adopted son to call on Catharine
Trotter, with a present of books; this was Peter King, still a young
man, but already M.P. for Beer Alston, and later to become Lord
Chancellor and the first Lord King of Ockham. George Burnet, writing
from Paris, had been very insistent that Catharine should not publish
her treatise, but she overruled his objections, and her _Defence of Mr.
Locke's Essay on the Human Understanding_ appeared anonymously in May
wrote to his "protectress" a charming letter in which he told her that
her "_Defence_ was the greatest honour my Essay could have procured me."
She sent her _Defence_ to Leibnitz, who criticised it at considerable
"J'ai lu livre de Mlle. Trotter. Dans la dedicace elle exhorte M.
Locke à donner des démonstrations de morale. Je crois qu'il aurait
eu de la peine à y reussir. L'art de démontrer n'est pas son fait.
Je tiens que nous nous appercevons sans raisonnement de ce qui est
juste et injuste, comme nous nous appercevons sans raison de
quelques theoremes de Geometrie; mais il est tousjours bon de venir
à la démonstration. Justice et injustice ne dependent seulement de
la nature humaine, mais de la nature de la substance intelligente
en général; et Mlle. Trotter remarque fort bien qu'elle vient de la
nature de Dieu et n'est point arbitraire. La nature de Dieu est
tousjours fondée en raison."
Notwithstanding all this, the commentators of Locke appear, without
exception, to ignore the _Defence_, and it was probably never much read
outside the cultivated Salisbury circle.
In this year, 1702, the health of Catharine Trotter began to give her
uneasiness, and it was for this reason that she left Salisbury for a
while. She was once more living in that city, however, from May 1703 to
March 1704, making a special study of geography. "My strength," she
writes to George Burnet, "is very much impaired, and God knows whether I
shall ever retrieve it." Her thoughts turned again to the stage, and in
the early months of 1703 she composed her fifth and last play, the
tragedy of _The Revolution in Sweden_; "but it will not be ready for
the stage," she says, "till next winter." Her interest in philosophy
did not flag. She was gratified by some communications, through Burnet,
with Leibnitz, and she would have liked to be the intermediary between
Locke and some philosophical "gentlemen" on the Continent, probably
Malebranche and Leibnitz, in a controversy. But this was hopeless, and
she writes (March 16th, 1704):--
"Mr. Locke is unwilling to engage in controversy with the gentlemen
you mention; for, I am informed, his infirmities have obliged him,
for some time past, to desist from his serious studies, and only
employ himself in lighter things, which serve to amuse and unbend
the mind."
Locke, indeed, had but six months more to live, and though he retained
his charming serenity of spirit he was well aware that the end
approached. Never contentious or desirous of making a sensation, he was
least of all, in his present precarious state, likely to enter into
discussion with foreign philosophers. It does not appear that Catharine
Trotter ever enjoyed the felicity of seeing in the flesh the greatest
object of her homage; but he occupied most of her thoughts. She was
rendered highly indignant by the efforts made by the reactionaries at
Oxford and elsewhere to discourage the writings of Locke and to throw
suspicion on their influence. She read over and over again his
philosophical, educational, and religious treatises, and ever found them
more completely to her taste. If she had enjoyed the power to do so she
would have proclaimed the wisdom and majesty of Locke from every
housetop, and she envied Lady Masham her free and constant intercourse
with so beautiful a mind. Catharine Trotter watched, but from a
distance, the extinction of a life thus honoured, which came to a
peaceful end at Oates on October 28th, 1704. The following passage does
not appear--or I am much mistaken--to have attracted the attention of
Locke's biographers:--
"I was very sensibly touched with the news of Mr. Locke's death.
All the particulars I hear of it are that he retained his perfect
senses to the last, and spoke with the same composedness and
indifference on affairs as usual. His discourse was much on the
different views a dying man has of worldly things; and that nothing
gives him any satisfaction, but the reflection of what good he has
done in his life. Lady Masham went to his chamber to speak to him
on some, business; when he had answered in the same manner he was
accustomed to speak, he desired her to leave the room, and,
immediately after she was gone, turned about and died."
She records that, after the death of Locke, Lady Masham communicated
with Leibnitz, and Catharine is very indignant because a doubt had been
suggested as to whether the writer's thoughts and expressions were her
own. This was calculated to infuriate Catharine Trotter, who outpours in
forcible terms her just indignation:--
"Women are as capable of penetrating into the grounds of things,
and reasoning justly, as men are, who certainly have no advantage
of us, but in their opportunities of knowledge. As Lady Masham is
allowed by everybody to have great natural endowments, she has
taken pains to improve them; and no doubt profited much by a long
intimate society with so extraordinary a man as Mr. Locke. So that
I see no reason to suspect a woman of her character would pretend
to write anything that was not entirely her own. I pray, be more
equitable to her sex than the generality of your's are, who, when
anything is written by a woman that they cannot deny their
approbation to, are sure to rob us of the glory of it by
concluding 'tis not her own."
This is the real voice of Catharine Trotter, raised to defend her sex,
and conscious of the many intellectual indignities and disabilities
which they suffered.
The first draft of _The Revolution in Sweden_ being now completed, she
sent it to Congreve, who was living very quietly in lodgings in Arundell
Street. He allowed some time to go by before, on November 2nd, 1703, he
acknowledged it. His criticism, which is extremely kind, is also
penetrating and full. "I think the design in general," he says, "very
great and noble; the conduct of it very artful, if not too full of
business which may run into length and obscurity." He warns her against
having too much noise of fighting on the stage in her second act, and
against offending probability in the third. The fourth act is confused,
and in the fifth there are too many harangues. Catharine Trotter has
asked him to be frank, and so he is, but his criticism is practical and
encouraging. This excellent letter deserves to be better known.
To continue the history of Miss Trotter's fifth and last play, _The
Revolution in Sweden_ was at length brought out at the Queen's Theatre
in the Haymarket, towards the close of 1704. It had every advantage
which popular acting could give it, since the part of the hero, Count
Arwide, was played by Betterton; that of Constantia, the heroine, by
Mrs. Barry; Gustavus by Booth; and Christina by Mrs. Harcourt. In spite
of this galaxy of talent, the reception of the play was unfavourable.
The Duchess of Marlborough "and all her beauteous family" graced the
theatre on the first night, but the public was cold and inattentive.
Some passages of a particularly lofty moral tone provoked laughter. _The
Revolution in Sweden_, in fact, was shown to suffer from the
ineradicable faults which Congreve had gently but justly suggested. It
was very long, and very dull, and very wordy, and we could scarcely find
a more deadly specimen of virtuous and didactic tragedy. Catharine was
dreadfully disappointed, nor was she completely consoled by being
styled--by no less a person than Sophia Charlotte, Queen of
Prussia--"The Sappho of Scotland." She determined, however, to appeal to
readers against auditors, and when, two years later, after still further
revision, she published _The Revolution in Sweden_, she dedicated it in
most grateful terms to the Duke of Marlborough's eldest daughter,
Henrietta Godolphin.
How Miss Trotter came to be favoured by the Churchills appears from
various sources to be this. Her brother-in-law, Dr. Inglis, was now
physician-general in the army, and was in personal relations with the
General. When the victory at Blenheim (August 1704) was announced,
Catharine Trotter wrote a poem of welcome back to England. It is to be
supposed that a manuscript copy of it was shown by Inglis to the Duke,
with whose permission it was published about a month later. The poem
enjoyed a tremendous success, for the Duke and Duchess and Lord
Treasurer Godolphin "and several others" all liked the verses and said
they were better than any other which had been written on the subject.
George Burnet, who saw the Duke in Germany, reported him highly pleased
with her--"the wisest virgin I ever knew," he writes. She now hoped,
with the Duke's protection, to recover her father's fortune and be no
longer a burden to her brother-in-law. A pension of £20 from Queen Anne
gave her mother now a shadow of independence, but Catharine herself was
wholly disappointed at that "settlement for my life" which she was
ardently hoping for. I think that, if she had secured it, George Burnet
would have come back from Germany to marry her. Instead of that he sent
her learned messages from Bayle and from Leibnitz, who calls her "une
Demoiselle fort spirituelle."
Catharine Trotter now left London and Salisbury, and took up her abode
at Ockham Mills, close to Ripley, in Surrey, as companion to an invalid,
Mrs. De Vere. She probably chose this place on account of the Locke
connection and the friendship of Peter King, since there is now much in
her correspondence about Damaris, Lady Masham, and others in that circle
in which George Burnet himself was intimate. But great changes were
imminent. Although her correspondence at this time is copious it is not
always very intelligible, and it is very carelessly edited. Her constant
interchange of letters with George Burnet leaves the real position
between them on many points obscure. In 1704, when he thought that he
was dying in Berlin, he wrote to Catharine Trotter that he had left her
£100 in his will, and added: "Pray God I might live to give you much
more myself." He regrets that he had so easily "pulled himself from her
company," and suggests that if she had not left London to settle in
Salisbury he would have stayed in England. Years after they had parted
we find him begging her to continue writing to him "at least once a
week." She, on her part, tells him that he well knows that there is but
one person she could ever think of marrying. He seems to have made her
want of vivid religious conviction the excuse for not proposing to her,
but it is not easy to put aside the conviction that it was her want of a
fortune which actuated him most strongly. Finally, he tries to pique her
by telling her that he "knows of parties" in the city of Hanover "who
might bring him much honour and comfort" were he "not afraid of losing
(Catharine Trotter's) friendship." They write to one another with
extreme formality, but that proves nothing. A young woman, passionately
in love with a man whom she had just accepted as her future husband,
was expected, in 1705, to close her letter by describing herself as
"Sir, your very humble servant."
If George Burnet hinted of "parties" in Hanover, Catharine Trotter on
her side could boast of Mr. Fenn, "a young clergyman of excellent
character," who now laid an ardent siege to her heart. Embarrassed by
these attentions, she took the bold step of placing the matter before
Mr. Cockburn, a still younger clergyman, of even more excellent
character. The letter in which she makes this ingenuous declaration as
to a father confessor is one of the tenderest examples extant of the
"Why don't you speak for yourself, John?" form of correspondence. Mr.
Cockburn, one of the minor clergy of the Salisbury set, did speak for
himself, and George Burnet having at length announced his own projected
marriage with a lady of old acquaintance, Catharine Trotter hesitated no
longer but accepted the hand of Mr. Cockburn. They were married early in
relations of these four people to one another, and in particular it
would have been very interesting to see what he would have made of the
character of George Burnet.
Catharine Cockburn was now, after so eventful a life of emotional and
intellectual experience, still a young woman, not far past her
twenty-eighth birthday. She was to survive for more than forty-three
years, during which time she was to correspond much, to write
persistently, and to publish whenever opportunity offered. But I do not
propose to accompany her much further on her blameless career. All
through her married life, which was spent at various places far from
London, she existed almost like a plant in a Leyden jar. Constant
genteel poverty, making it difficult for her to buy books and impossible
to travel was supported by her with dignity and patience, but it dwarfed
her powers. Her later writings, on philosophy, on morality, on the
principles of the Christian religion, are so dull that merely to think
of them brings tears into one's eyes. She who had sparkled as a girl
with Congreve and exchanged polite amenities with Locke lived on to see
modern criticism begin with Samuel Johnson and the modern novel start
with Samuel Richardson, but without observing that any change had come
into the world of letters. Her husband, owing to his having fallen "into
a scruple about the oath of abjuration," lost his curacy and "was
reduced to great difficulties in the support of his family."
Nevertheless--a perfect gentleman at heart--he "always prayed for the
King and Royal family by name." Meanwhile, to uplift his spirits in this
dreadful condition, he is discovered engaged upon a treatise on the
Mosaic deluge, which he could persuade no publisher to print. He reminds
us of Dr. Primrose in _The Vicar of Wakefield_, and, like him, Mr.
Cockburn probably had strong views on the Whistonian doctrine.
So little mark did poor Mrs. Cockburn make on her younger contemporaries
that she disappeared forthwith from literary history. Her works,
especially her plays, have become so excessively rare as to be almost
unprocurable. The brief narrative of her life and her activities which I
have taken the liberty of presenting to-day would be hopelessly engulfed
in obscurity, and we should know as little of Catharine Trotter as we do
of Mary Pix, and Delariviere Manley, and many late seventeenth-century
authors more eminent than they, had it not been that in 1751, two years
after her death, all her papers were placed in the hands of an ingenious
clergyman, the Rev. Dr. Thomas Birch, who printed them for subscribers
in two thick and singularly unpleasing volumes. This private edition was
never reissued, and is now itself a rare book. It is the sort of book
that for two hundred and fifty years must fatally have been destroyed as
lumber whenever an old country mansion that contained it has been
cleared out.
During all that time no one, so far as I can discover, has evinced the
smallest interest in Catharine Trotter. We gain an idea of the blackness
of her obscurity when we say that even Mr. Austin Dobson appears to have
never heard of her. The champion of Locke and Clarke, the correspondent
of Leibnitz and Pope, the friend of Congreve, the patroness of Farquhar,
she seems to have slipped between two ages and to have lost her hold on
time. But I hope her thin little lady-like ghost, still hovering in a
phantom-like transparence round the recognised seats of learning, will
be a little comforted at last by the polite attention of a few of my
readers.
literature of fiction, which Mr. Montague Summers has investigated in
The origins of the Romantic Movement in literature have been examined so
closely and so often that it might be supposed that the subject must be
by this time exhausted. But no subject of any importance in literature
is ever exhausted, because the products of literature grow or decay,
burgeon or wither, as the generations of men apply their ever-varying
organs of perception to them. I intend, with your permission, to present
to you a familiar phase of the literary life of the eighteenth century
from a fresh point of view, and in relation to two men whose surname
warrants a peculiar emphasis of respect in the mouth of a Warton
Lecturer. It is well, perhaps, to indicate exactly what it is which a
lecturer proposes to himself to achieve during the brief hour in which
you indulge him with your attention; it certainly makes his task the
easier if he does so. I propose, therefore, to endeavour to divine for
you, by scanty signs and indications, what it was in poetry, as it
existed up to the period of their childhood, which was stimulating to
the Wartons, and what they disapproved of in the verse which was
fashionable and popular among the best readers in their day.
There is an advantage, which I think that our critics are apt to
neglect, in analysing the character and causes of poetic pleasure
experienced by any sincere and enthusiastic reader, at any epoch of
history. We are far too much in the habit of supposing that what
we--that is the most instructed and sensitive of us--admire now must
always have been admired by people of a like condition. This has been
one of the fallacies of Romantic criticism, and has led people as
illustrious as Keats into blaming the taste of foregoing generations as
if it were not only heretical, but despicable as well. Young men to-day
speak of those who fifty years ago expatiated in admiration of Tennyson
as though they were not merely stupid, but vulgar and almost wicked,
neglectful of the fact that it was by persons exactly analogous to
themselves that those portions of Tennyson were adored which the young
repudiate to-day. Not to expand too largely this question of the
oscillation of taste--which, however, demands more careful examination
than it has hitherto received--it is always important to discover what
was honestly admired at a given date by the most enthusiastic and
intelligent, in other words by the most poetic, students of poetry. But
to do this we must cultivate a little of that catholicity of heart which
perceives technical merit wherever it has been recognised at an earlier
date, and not merely where the current generation finds it.
Joseph and Thomas Warton were the sons of an Oxford professor of poetry,
an old Jacobite of no observable merit beyond that of surrounding his
family with an atmosphere of the study of verse. The elder brother was
born in 1722, the younger in 1728. I must be forgiven if I dwell a
little tediously on dates, for our inquiry depends upon the use of them.
Without dates the whole point of that precedency of the Wartons, which I
desire to bring out, is lost. The brothers began very early to devote
themselves to the study of poetry, and in spite of the six years which
divided them, they appear to have meditated in unison. Their writings
bear a close resemblance to one another, and their merits and their
failures are alike identical. We have to form what broken impression we
can of their early habits. Joseph is presented to us as wandering in the
woodlands, lost in a melancholy fit, or waking out of it to note with
ecstasy all the effects of light and colour around him, the flight of
birds, the flutter of foliage, the panorama of cloudland. He and Thomas
were alike in their "extreme thirst after ancient things." They avoided,
with a certain disdain, the affectation of vague and conventional
reference to definite objects.
Above all they read the poets who were out of fashion, and no doubt the
library of their father, the Professor of Poetry, was at their disposal
from a very early hour. The result of their studies was a remarkable
one, and the discovery was unquestionably first made by Joseph. He was,
so far as we can gather, the earliest person in the modern world of
Europe to observe what vain sacrifices had been made by the classicists,
and in particular by the English classicists, and as he walked
enthusiastically in the forest he formed a determination to reconquer
the realm of lost beauty. The moment that this instinct became a
purpose, we may say that the great Romantic Movement, such as it has
enlarged and dwindled down to our own day, took its start. The Wartons
were not men of creative genius, and their works, whether in prose or
verse, have not taken hold of the national memory. But the advance of a
great army is not announced by a charge of field-marshals. In the
present war, the advance of the enemy upon open cities has generally
been announced by two or three patrols on bicycles, who are the heralds
of the body. Joseph and Thomas Warton were the bicyclist-scouts who
prophesied of an advance which was nearly fifty years delayed.
The general history of English literature in the eighteenth century
offers us little opportunity for realising what the environment could be
of two such lads as the Wartons, with their enthusiasm, their
independence, and their revolutionary instinct. But I will take the year
definite starting-point of European Romanticism. You will perhaps find
it convenient to compare the situation of the Wartons with what is the
situation to-day of some very modern or revolutionary young poet. In
Pope had died six years before, and this was equivalent to the death of
Swinburne in the experience of our young man of to-day. Addison's death
was as distant as is from us that of Matthew Arnold; and Thomson, who
had been dead two years, had left The _Castle of Indolence_ as an
equivalent to Mr. Hardy's _Dynasts_. All the leading writers of the age
of Anne--except Young, who hardly belonged to it--were dead, but the
Wartons were divided from them only as we are from those of the age of
Victoria. I have said that Pope was not more distant from them than
Swinburne is from us, but really a more just parallel is with Tennyson.
The Wartons, wandering in their woodlands, were confronted with a
problem such as would be involved, to a couple of youths to-day, in
considering the reputation of Tennyson and Browning.
There remains no doubt in my mind, after a close examination of such
documents as remain to us, that Joseph Warton, whose attitude has
hitherto been strangely neglected, was in fact the active force in this
remarkable revolt against existing conventions in the world of
imaginative art. His six years of priority would naturally give him an
advantage over his now better-known and more celebrated brother.
Moreover, we have positive evidence of the firmness of his opinions at a
time when his brother Thomas was still a child. The preface to Joseph's
_Odes_ of 1746 remains as a dated document, a manifesto, which admits of
no question. But the most remarkable of his poems, "The Enthusiast," was
stated to have been written in 1740, when he was eighteen and his
brother only twelve years of age. It is, of course, possible that these
verses, which bear no sign of juvenile mentality, were touched up at a
later date. But this could only be a matter of diction, of revision, and
we are bound to accept the definite and repeated statement of Joseph,
that they were essentially composed in 1740. If we accept this as a
fact, "The Enthusiast" is seen to be a document of extraordinary
importance. I do not speak of the positive merit of the poem, which it
would be easy to exaggerate. Gray, in a phrase which has been much
discussed, dismissed the poetry of Joseph Warton by saying that he had
"no choice at all." It is evident to me that Gray meant by this to
stigmatise the diction of Joseph Warton, which is jejune, verbose, and
poor. He had little magic in writing; he fails to express himself with
creative charm. But this is not what constitutes his interest for us,
which is moreover obscured by the tameness of his Miltonic-Thomsonian
versification. What should arrest our attention is the fact that here,
for the first time, we find unwaveringly emphasised and repeated what
was entirely new in literature, the essence of romantic hysteria. "The
Enthusiast" is the earliest expression of full revolt against the
classical attitude which had been sovereign in all European literature
for nearly a century. So completely is this expressed by Joseph Warton
that it is extremely difficult to realise that he could not have come
under the fascination of Rousseau, whose apprenticeship to love and
idleness was now drawing to a close at Les Charmettes, and who was not
to write anything characteristic until ten years later.
But these sentiments were in the air. Some of them had vaguely occurred
to Young, to Dyer, and to Shenstone, all of whom received from Joseph
Warton the ardent sympathy which a young man renders to his immediate
contemporaries. The Scotch resumption of ballad-poetry held the same
relation to the Wartons as the so-called Celtic Revival would to a young
poet to-day; the _Tea-Table Miscellany_ dates from 1724, and Allan
Ramsay was to the author of "The Enthusiast" what Mr. Yeats is to us.
But all these were glimmerings or flashes; they followed no system, they
were accompanied by no principles of selection or rejection. These we
find for the first time in Joseph Warton. He not merely repudiates the
old formulas and aspirations, but he defines new ones. What is very
interesting to observe in his attitude to the accepted laws of poetical
practice is his solicitude for the sensations of the individual. These
had been reduced to silence by the neo-classic school in its
determination to insist on broad Palladian effects of light and line.
The didactic and moral aim of the poets had broken the springs of
lyrical expression, and had replaced those bursts of enthusiasm, those
indiscretions, those rudenesses which are characteristic of a romantic
spirit in literature, by eloquence, by caution, by reticence and
vagueness.
It is not necessary to indicate more than very briefly what the
principles of the classic poetry had been. The time had passed when
readers and writers in England gave much attention to the sources of the
popular poetry of their day. Malherbe had never been known here, and the
vigorous _Art poétique_ of Boileau, which had been eagerly studied at
the close of the seventeenth century, was forgotten. Even the Prefaces
of Dryden had ceased to be read, and the sources of authority were now
the prose of Addison and the verse of Pope. To very young readers these
stood in the same relation as the writings of the post-Tennysonian
critics stand now. To reject them, to question their authority, was
like eschewing the essays of Matthew Arnold and Walter Pater. In
particular, the _Essay on Criticism_ was still immensely admired and
read; it had crystallised around cultivated opinion very much as the
_Studies in the Renaissance_ did from 1875 onwards. It was the last
brilliant word on the aims and experiences of poetical art, and how
brilliant it was can be judged by the pleasure with which we read it
to-day, in spite of our total repudiation of every æsthetic dogma which
it conveys. It is immortal, like every supreme literary expression, and
it stands before us in the history of poetry as an enduring landmark.
This was the apparently impregnable fortress which the Wartons had the
temerity to bombard.
Pope had said that Nature was the best guide to judgment, but what did
he mean by nature? He had meant the "rules," which he declared were
"Nature methodis'd" or, as we should say, systematised. The "rules" were
the maxims, rather than laws, expressed by Aristotle in a famous
treatise. The poet was to follow the Stagirite, "led"--as Pope says in
one of those rare lines in which he catches, in spite of himself, the
Romantic accent--"led by the light of the Mæonian Star." Aristotle
illustrated by Homer--that was to be the standard of all poetic
expression. But literature had wandered far from Homer, and we have to
think of what rules the _Essay on Criticism_ laid down. The poet was to
be cautious, "to avoid extremes": he must be conventional, never
"singular"; there was constant reference to "Wit," "Nature," and "The
Muse," and these were convertible terms. A single instance is luminous.
We have the positive authority of Warburton for saying that Pope
regarded as the finest effort of his skill and art as a poet the
insertion of the machinery of the Sylphs into the revised edition of
_The Rape of the Lock_ (1714). Now this insertion was ingenious,
brilliant, and in strict accordance with the practice of Vida and of
Boileau, both of whom it excelled. But the whole conception of it was as
unlike that of Romanticism as possible.
In particular, the tendency of the classic school, in its later
development, had been towards the exclusion of all but didactic and
ethical considerations from treatment in verse. Pope had given great and
ever-increasing emphasis to the importance of making "morals" prominent
in poetry. All that he wrote after he retired to Twickenham, still a
young man, in 1718, was essentially an attempt to gather together "moral
wisdom" clothed in consummate language. He inculcated a moderation of
feeling, a broad and general study of mankind, an acceptance of the
benefits of civilisation, and a suppression of individuality. Even in so
violent and so personal a work as the _Dunciad_ he expends all the
resources of his genius to make his anger seem moral and his indignation
a public duty. This conception of the ethical responsibility of verse
was universal, and even so late as 1745, long after the composition of
Warton's "Enthusiast," we find Blacklock declaring, with general
acceptance, that "poetical genius depends entirely on the quickness of
moral feeling," and that not to "feel poetry" was the result of having
"the affections and internal senses depraved by vice."
The most important innovation suggested by Joseph Warton was an
outspoken assertion that this was by no means the object or the proper
theme of poetry. His verses and those of his brother, the _Essay on
Pope_ of the elder, the critical and historical writings of the younger,
may be searched in vain for the slightest evidence of moral or didactic
sentiment. The instructive and ethical mannerisms of the later
classicists had produced some beautiful and more accomplished verse,
especially of a descriptive order, but its very essence had excluded
self-revelation. Dennis, at whom Pope taught the world to laugh, but
who was in several respects a better critic than either Addison or
himself, had come close to the truth sometimes, but was for ever edged
away from it by the intrusion of the moral consideration. Dennis feels
things æsthetically, but he blunders into ethical definition. The result
was that the range of poetry was narrowed to the sphere of didactic
reflection, a blunt description of scenery or objects being the only
relief, since
"who could take offence
While pure description held the place of sense?"
To have perceived the bankruptcy of the didactic poem is Joseph Warton's
most remarkable innovation. The lawlessness of the Romantic Movement, or
rather its instinct for insisting that genius is a law unto itself, is
first foreshadowed in "The Enthusiast," and when the history of the
school comes to be written there will be a piquancy in tracing an
antinomianism down from the blameless Wartons to the hedonist essays of,
Oscar Wilde and the frenzied anarchism of the Futurists. Not less
remarkable, or less characteristic, was the revolt against the quietism
of the classical school. "Avoid extremes," Pope had said, and
moderation, calmness, discretion, absence of excitement had been laid
down as capital injunctions. Joseph Warton's very title, "The
Enthusiast," was a challenge, for "enthusiasm" was a term of reproach.
He was himself a scandal to classical reserve. Mant, in the course of
some excellent lines addressed to Joseph Warton, remarks
"Thou didst seek
Ecstatic vision by the haunted stream
Or grove of fairy: then thy nightly ear,
As from the wild notes of some airy harp,
Thrilled with strange music."
The same excess of sensibility is still more clearly divulged in
Joseph's own earliest verses:--
"All beauteous Nature! by thy boundless charms
Oppress'd, O where shall I begin thy praise,
Where turn the ecstatic eye, _how ease my breast
That pants with wild astonishment and love_?"
The Nature here addressed is a very different thing from the "Nature
methodis'd" of the _Essay on Criticism_. It is not to be distinguished
from the object of pantheistic worship long afterwards to be celebrated
in widely differing language, but with identical devotion, by Wordsworth
and Senancour, by Chateaubriand and Shelley.
Closely connected with this attitude towards physical nature is the
determination to deepen the human interest in poetry, to concentrate
individuality in passion. At the moment when the Wartons put forth their
ideas, a change was taking place in English poetry, but not in the
direction of earnest emotion. The instrument of verse had reached an
extraordinary smoothness, and no instance of its capability could be
more interesting than the poetry of Shenstone, with his perfect
utterance of things essentially not worth saying. In the most important
writers of that very exhausted moment, technical skill seems the only
quality calling for remark, and when we have said all that sympathy can
say for Whitehead and Akenside, the truth remains that the one is vapid,
the other empty. The Wartons saw that more liberty of imagination was
wanted, and that the Muse was not born to skim the meadows, in short low
flights, like a wagtail. They used expressions which reveal their
ambition. The poet was to be "bold, without confine," and "imagination's
chartered libertine"; like a sort of Alastor, he was
"in venturous bark to ride
Down turbulent Delight's tempestuous tide."
These are aspirations somewhat absurdly expressed, but the aim of them
is undeniable and noteworthy.
A passion for solitude always precedes the romantic obsession, and in
examining the claim of the Wartons to be pioneers, we naturally look for
this element. We find it abundantly in their early verses. When Thomas
was only seventeen--the precocity of the brothers was remarkable--he
wrote a "Pleasures of Melancholy," in which he expresses his wish to
retire to "solemn glooms, congenial to the soul." In the early odes of
his brother Joseph we find still more clearly indicated the intention to
withdraw from the world, in order to indulge the susceptibilities of the
spirit in solitary reflection. A curious air of foreshadowing the
theories of Rousseau, to which I have already referred, produces an
effect which is faintly indicated, but in its phantom way unique in
English literature up to that date, 1740. There had been a tendency to
the sepulchral in the work of several writers, in particular in the
powerful and preposterous religious verse of Isaac Watts, but nothing
had been suggested in the pure Romantic style.
In Joseph Warton, first, we meet with the individualist attitude to
nature; a slightly hysterical exaggeration of feeling which was to be
characteristic of romance; an intention of escaping from the vanity of
mankind by an adventure into the wilds; a purpose of recovering
primitive manners by withdrawing into primitive conditions; a passion
for what we now consider the drawing-master's theory of the
picturesque--the thatched cottage, the ruined castle with the moon
behind it, the unfettered rivulet, the wilderness of
"the pine-topped precipice
Abrupt and shaggy."
There was already the fallacy, to become so irresistibly attractive to
the next generation, that man in a state of civilisation was in a
decayed and fallen condition, and that to achieve happiness he must
wander back into a Golden Age. Pope, in verses which had profoundly
impressed two generations, had taken the opposite view, and had proved
to the satisfaction of theologian and free-thinker alike that
"God and Nature link'd the general frame,
And bade Self-love and Social be the same."
Joseph Warton would have nothing to say to Social Love. He designed, or
pretended to design, to emigrate to the backwoods of America, to live
"With simple Indian swains, that I may hunt
The boar and tiger through savannahs wild,
Through fragrant deserts and through citron groves,"
indulging, without the slightest admixture of any active moral principle
in social life, all the ecstasies, all the ravishing emotions, of an
abandonment to excessive sensibility. The soul was to be, no longer the
"little bark attendant" that "pursues the triumph and partakes the gale"
in Pope's complacent _Fourth Epistle_, but an æolian harp hung in some
cave of a primeval forest for the winds to rave across in solitude.
"Happy the first of men, ere yet confin'd
To smoky cities."
Already the voice is that of Obermann, of René, of Byron.
Another point in which the recommendations of the Wartons far outran the
mediocrity of their execution was their theory of description. To
comprehend the state of mind in which such pieces of stately verse as
Parnell's _Hermit_ or Addison's _Campaign_ could be regarded as
satisfactory in the setting of their descriptive ornament we must
realise the aim which those poets put before them. Nothing was to be
mentioned by its technical--or even by its exact name; no clear picture
was to be raised before the inner eye; nothing was to be left definite
or vivid. We shall make a very great mistake if we suppose this
conventional vagueness to have been accidental, and a still greater if
we attribute it to a lack of cleverness. When Pope referred to the
sudden advent of a heavy shower at a funeral in these terms--
"'Tis done, and nature's various charms decay;
See gloomy clouds obscure the cheerful day!
Now hung with pearls the dropping trees appear,
Their faded honours scatter'd on her bier,"
it was not because he had not the skill to come into closer touch with
reality, but that he did not wish to do so. It had been plainly laid
down by Malherbe and confirmed by Boileau that objects should be named
in general, not in precise terms. We are really, in studying the
descriptive parts of the Classicist poets, very close to the theories of
Mallarmé and the Symbolists which occupied us twenty years ago. The
object of the poet was not to present a vivid picture to the reader, but
to start in him a state of mind.
We must recollect, in considering what may seem to us the sterility and
stiffness of the English poets from 1660 to 1740, that they were
addressing a public which, after the irregular violence and anarchical
fancy of the middle of the seventeenth century, had begun to yearn for
regularity, common sense, and a moderation in relative variety. The
simplest ideas should be chosen, and should depend for their poetical
effect, not upon a redundant and gorgeous ornament, but solely upon
elegance of language. There were certain references, certain channels of
imagery, which were purely symbolical, and these could be defended only
on the understanding that they produced on the mind of the reader,
instantly and without effort, the illustrative effect required. For
instance, with all these neo-classicists, the mythological allusions,
which seem vapid and ridiculous to us, were simplified metaphor and a
question of style. In short, it rested the jaded imagination of Europe,
after Gongora and Marini, Donne and D'Aubigné, to sink back on a poetry
which had taken a vow to remain scrupulous, elegant, and selected.
But the imagination of England was now beginning to be impatient of
these bonds. It was getting tired of a rest-cure so prolonged. It asked
for more colour, more exuberance, more precise reproduction of visual
impressions. Thomson had summed up and had carried to greater lengths
the instinct for scenery which had never entirely died out in England,
except for a few years after the Restoration. It was left to Joseph
Warton, however, to rebel against the whole mode in which the cabbage of
landscape was shredded into the classical _pot-au-feu_. He proposes
that, in place of the mention of "Idalia's groves," when Windsor Forest
is intended, and of milk-white bulls sacrificed to Phoebus at
Twickenham, the poets should boldly mention in their verses English
"places remarkably romantic, the supposed habitation of druids, bards,
and wizards," and he vigorously recommends Theocritus as a model far
superior to Pope because of the greater exactitude of his references to
objects, and because of his more realistic appeal to the imagination.
Description, Warton says, should be uncommon, exact, not symbolic and
allusive, but referring to objects clearly, by their real names. He very
pertinently points out that Pope, in a set piece of extraordinary
cleverness--which was to be read, more than half a century later, even
by Wordsworth, with pleasure--confines himself to rural beauty in
general, and declines to call up before us the peculiar beauties which
characterise the Forest of Windsor.
A specimen of Joseph Warton's descriptive poetry may here be given, not
for its great inherent excellence, but because it shows his resistance
to the obstinate classic mannerism:--
"Tell me the path, sweet wanderer, tell,
To thy unknown sequestered cell,
Where woodbines cluster round the door,
Where shells and moss o'erlay the floor,
And on whose top an hawthorn blows,
Amid whose thickly-woven boughs
Some nightingale still builds her nest,
Each evening warbling thee to rest;
Then lay me by the haunted stream,
Rapt in some wild poetic dream,
In converse while methinks I rove
With Spenser through a fairy grove."
To show how identical were the methods of the two brothers we may
compare the foregoing lines with the following from Thomas Warton's "Ode
on the Approach of Summer" (published when he was twenty-five, and
possibly written much earlier):--
"His wattled cotes the shepherd plaits;
Beneath her elm the milkmaid chats;
The woodman, speeding home, awhile
Rests him at a shady stile;
Nor wants there fragrance to dispense
Refreshment o'er my soothèd sense;
Nor tangled woodbine's balmy bloom,
Nor grass besprent to breathe perfume,
Nor lurking wild-thyme's spicy sweet
To bathe in dew my roving feet;
Nor wants there note of Philomel,
Nor sound of distant-tinkling bell,
Nor lowings faint of herds remote,
Nor mastiff's bark from bosom'd cot;
Rustle the breezes lightly borne
O'er deep embattled ears of corn;
Round ancient elms, with humming noise,
Full loud the chafer-swarms rejoice."
The youthful poet is in full revolt against the law which forbade his
elders to mention objects by their plain names. Here we notice at once,
as we do in similar early effusions of both the Wartons, the direct
influence of Milton's lyrics. To examine the effect of the rediscovery
of Milton upon the poets of the middle of the eighteenth century would
lead us too far from the special subject of our inquiry to-day. But it
must be pointed out that _L'Allegro_ and _Il Penseroso_ had been
entirely neglected, and practically unknown, until a date long after the
rehabilitation of _Paradise Lost_. The date at which Handel set them to
music, 1740, is that of the revived or discovered popularity of these
two odes, which then began to be fashionable, at all events among the
younger poets. They formed a bridge, which linked the new writers with
the early seventeenth century across the Augustan Age, and their
versification as well as their method of description were as much
resisted by the traditional Classicists as they were attractive, and
directly preferred above those of Pope, by the innovators. Joseph
Warton, who attributed many of the faults of modern lyrical writing to
the example of Petrarch, sets Milton vehemently over against him, and
entreats the poets "to accustom themselves to contemplate fully every
object before they attempt to describe it." They were above all to avoid
nauseous repetition of commonplaces, and what Warton excellently calls
"hereditary images."
We must not, however, confine ourselves to a consideration of "The
Enthusiast" of 1740 and the preface to the _Odes_ of 1746. Certain of
the expressions, indeed, already quoted, are taken from the two very
important critical works which the brothers published while they were
still quite young. We must now turn particularly to Joseph Warton's
_Essay on the Genius of Pope_ of 1756, and to Thomas Warton's
_Observations on the Faerie Queene_ of 1754. Of these the former is the
more important and the more readable. Joseph's _Essay on Pope_ is an
extraordinary production for the time at which it was produced. Let me
suggest that we make a great mistake in treating the works of old
writers as if they had been always written by old men. I am trying to
present the Wartons to you as I see them, and that is as enthusiastic
youths, flushed with a kind of intellectual felicity, and dreaming how
poetry shall be produced as musicians make airs, by inspiration, not by
rote. Remember that when they took their walks in the forest at
Hackwood, the whole world of culture held that true genius had expired
with Pope, and this view was oracularly supported by Warburton and
such-like pundits. I have already pointed out to you that Pope was
divided from them not more than Swinburne is divided from us. Conceive
two very young men to-day putting their heads together to devise a
scheme of poetry which should entirely supersede that, not of Swinburne
only, but of Tennyson and Browning also, and you have the original
attitude of the Wartons.
It is difficult for us to realise what was the nature of the spell which
Pope threw over the literary conscience of the eighteenth century. Forty
years after the revolt of the Wartons, Pope was still looked upon by the
average critic as "the most distinguished and the most interesting Poet
of the nation." Joseph Warton was styled "the Winton Pedant" for
suggesting that Pope paid too dearly for his lucidity and lightness, and
for desiring to break up with odes and sonnets the oratorical mould
which gave a monotony of form to early eighteenth-century verse. His
_Essay on Pope_, though written with such studied moderation that we
may, in a hasty reading, regard it almost as a eulogy, was so shocking
to the prejudices of the hour that it was received with universal
disfavour, and twenty-six years passed before the author had the moral
courage to pursue it to a conclusion. He dedicated it to Young, who,
alone of the Augustans, had admitted that charm in a melancholy
solitude, that beauty of funereal and mysterious effects, which was to
be one of the leading characteristics of the Romantic School, and who
dimly perceived the sublime and the pathetic to be "the two chief nerves
of all genuine poetry."
Warton's _Essay on the Genius of Pope_ is not well arranged, and, in
spite of eloquent passages, as literature it does not offer much
attraction to the reader of the present day. But its thesis is one which
is very interesting to us, and was of startling novelty when it was
advanced. In the author's own words it was to prove that "a clear head
and acute understanding are not sufficient, alone, to make a poet." The
custom of critics had been to say that, when supported by a profound
moral sense, they were sufficient, and Pope was pointed to as the
overwhelming exemplar of the truth of this statement. Pope had taken
this position himself and, as life advanced, the well of pure poetry in
him had dried up more and more completely, until it had turned into a
sort of fountain of bright, dry sand, of which the _Epilogue to the
Satires_, written in 1738, when Joseph Warton was sixteen years of age,
may be taken as the extreme instance. The young author of the _Essay_
made the earliest attempt which any one made to put Pope in his right
place, that is to say, not to deny him genius or to deprecate the
extreme pleasure readers found in his writings, but to insist that, by
the very nature of his gifts, his was genius of a lower rank than that
of the supreme poets, with whom he was commonly paralleled when he was
not preferred to them all.
Warton admitted but three supreme English poets--Spenser, Shakespeare,
Milton--and he vehemently insisted that moral, didactic and panegyrical
poetry could never rise above the second class in importance. To assert
this was not merely to offend against the undoubted supremacy of Pope,
but it was to flout the claims of all those others to whom the age gave
allegiance. Joseph Warton does not shrink from doing this, and he gives
reason for abating the claims of all the classic favourites--Cowley,
Waller, Dryden, Addison. When it was advanced against him that he showed
arrogance in placing his opinion against that of a multitude of highly
trained judges, he replied that a real "relish and enjoyment of poetry"
is a rare quality, and "a creative and glowing imagination" possessed by
few. When the _dicta_ of Boileau were quoted against him, he repudiated
their authority with scarcely less vivacity than Keats was to display
half a century later.
Joseph Warton's _Essay_ wanders about, and we may acknowledge ourselves
more interested in the mental attitude which it displays than in the
detail of its criticism. The author insists, with much force, on the
value of a grandiose melancholy and a romantic horror in creating a
poetical impression, and he allows himself to deplore that Pope was so
ready to forget that "wit and satire are transitory and perishable, but
nature and passion are eternal." We need not then be surprised when
Joseph Warton boldly protests that no other part of the writings of Pope
approaches _Eloisa to Abelard_ in the quality of being "truly poetical."
He was perhaps led to some indulgence by the fact that this is the one
composition in which Pope appears to be indebted to Milton's lyrics, but
there was much more than that. So far as I am aware, _Eloisa to Abelard_
had never taken a high place with Pope's extreme admirers, doubtless
because of its obsession with horror and passion. But when we read how
"o'er the twilight groves and dusky caves,
Long-sounding aisles, and intermingled graves,
Black melancholy sits, and round her throws
A death-like silence and a dead repose,"
and still more when we reflect on the perpetual and powerful appeals
which the poem makes to emotion unbridled by moral scruple, we have no
difficulty in perceiving why _Eloisa to Abelard_ exercised so powerful
an attraction on Joseph Warton. The absence of ethical reservation, the
licence, in short, was highly attractive to him, and he rejoiced in
finding Pope, even so slightly, even so briefly, faithless to his
formula. It is worth while to note that Joseph Warton's sympathy with
the sentimental malady of the soul which lies at the core of Romanticism
permitted him to be, perhaps, the first man since the Renaissance who
recognised with pleasure the tumult of the _Atys_ of Catullus and the
febrile sensibility of Sappho.
Both brothers urged that more liberty of imagination was what English
poetry needed; that the lark had been shut up long enough in a gilded
cage. We have a glimpse of Thomas Warton introducing the study of the
great Italian classics into Oxford at a very early age, and we see him
crowned with laurel in the common-room of Trinity College at the age of
nineteen. This was in the year before the death of Thomson. No doubt he
was already preparing his _Observations on the Faerie Queene_, which
came out a little later. He was Professor of Poetry at Oxford before he
was thirty. Both the brothers took great pleasure in the study of
Spenser, and they both desired that the supernatural "machinery" of
Ariosto, in common with the romance of _The Faerie Queene_, should be
combined with a description of nature as untrimmed and unshackled as
possible. Thomas Warton, in his remarkable Oxford poem, "The Painted
Window," describes himself as
"A faithless truant to the classic page,
Long have I loved to catch the simple chime
Of minstrel-harps, and spell the fabling rhyme,"
and again he says:--
"I soothed my sorrows with the dulcet lore
Which Fancy fabled in her elfin age,"
that is to say when Spenser was writing "upon Mulla's shore."
After all this, the Observations on the Faerie Queene of 1754 is rather
disappointing. Thomas was probably much more learned as a historian of
literature than Joseph, but he is not so interesting a critic. Still, he
followed exactly the same lines, with the addition of a wider knowledge.
His reading is seen to be already immense, but he is tempted to make too
tiresome a display of it. Nevertheless, he is as thorough as his brother
in his insistence upon qualities which we have now learned to call
Romantic, and he praises all sorts of old books which no one then spoke
of with respect. He warmly recommends the _Morte d'Arthur_, which had
probably not found a single admirer since 1634. When he mentions Ben
Jonson, it is characteristic that it is to quote the line about "the
charmed boats and the enchanted wharves," which sounds like a foretaste
of Keats's "magic casements opening on the foam of perilous seas." The
public of Warton's day had relegated all tales about knights, dragons,
and enchanters to the nursery, and Thomas Warton shows courage in
insisting that they are excellent subjects for serious and adult
literature. He certainly would have thoroughly enjoyed the romances of
Mrs. Radcliffe, whom a later generation was to welcome as "the mighty
magician bred and nourished by the Muses in their sacred solitary
caverns, amid the paler shrines of Gothic superstition," and he despised
the neo-classic make-believe of grottoes. He says, with firmness, that
epic poetry--and he is thinking of Ariosto, Tasso, and Spenser--would
never have been written if the critical judgments current in 1754 had
been in vogue.
Thomas Warton closely studied the influence of Ariosto on Spenser, and
no other part of the _Observations_ is so valuable as the pages in which
those two poets are contrasted. He remarked the polish of the former
poet with approval, and he did not shrink from what is violently
fantastic in the plot of the _Orlando Furioso_. On that point he says,
"The present age is too fond of manner'd poetry to relish fiction and
fable," but perhaps he did not observe that although there is no
chivalry in _The Schoolmistress_, that accomplished piece was the
indirect outcome of the Italian mock-heroic epics. The Classicists had
fought for lucidity and common sense, whereas to be tenebrous and vague
was a merit with the precursors of Romanticism, or at least, without
unfairness, we may say that they asserted the power of imagination to
make what was mysterious, and even fabulous, true to the fancy. This
tendency, which we first perceive in the Wartons, rapidly developed, and
it led to the blind enthusiasm with which the vapourings of Macpherson
were presently received. The earliest specimens of _Ossian_ were
revealed to a too-credulous public in 1760, but I find no evidence of
any welcome which they received from either Joseph or Thomas. The
brothers personally preferred a livelier and more dramatic presentation,
and when Dr. Johnson laughed at Collins because "he loved fairies,
genii, giants, and monsters," the laugh was really at the expense of his
school-fellow Joseph Warton, to whom Collins seems to have owed his
boyish inspiration, although he was by a few months the senior.
Johnson was a resolute opponent of the principles of the Wartons, though
he held Thomas, at least, in great personal regard. He objected to the
brothers that they "affected the obsolete when it was not worthy of
revival," and his boutade about their own poetry is well known:--
"Phrase that time hath flung away,
Uncouth words in disarray,
Trick'd in antique ruff and bonnet,
Ode and elegy and sonnet."
This conservatism was not peculiar to Johnson; there was a general
tendency to resist the reintroduction into language and literature of
words and forms which had been allowed to disappear. A generation later,
a careful and thoughtful grammarian like Gilpin was in danger of being
dismissed as "a cockscomb" because he tried to enlarge our national
vocabulary. The Wartons were accused of searching old libraries for
glossaries of disused terms in order to display them in their own
writings. This was not quite an idle charge; it is to be noted as one of
the symptoms of active Romanticism that it is always dissatisfied with
the diction commonly in use, and desires to dazzle and mystify by
embroidering its texture with archaic and far-fetched words. Chatterton,
who was not yet born when the Wartons formed and expressed their ideas,
was to carry this instinct to a preposterous extreme in his Rowley
forgeries, where he tries to obtain a mediæval colouring by transferring
words out of an imperfect Anglo-Saxon lexicon, often without discerning
the actual meaning of those words.
Both the Wartons continued, in successive disquisitions, to repeat their
definition of poetry, but it cannot be said that either of them
advanced. So far as Joseph is concerned, he seems early to have
succumbed to the pressure of the age and of his surroundings. In 1766 he
became head master of Winchester, and settled down after curious
escapades which had nothing poetical about them. In the head master of a
great public school, reiterated murmurs against bondage to the Classical
Greeks and Romans would have been unbecoming, and Joseph Warton was a
man of the world. Perhaps in the solitude of his study he murmured, as
disenchanted enthusiasts often murmur, "Say, are the days of blest
delusion fled?" Yet traces of the old fire were occasionally manifest;
still each brother woke up at intervals to censure the criticism of
those who did not see that imagination must be paramount in poetry, and
who made the mistake of putting "discernment" in the place of
"enthusiasm." I hardly know why it gives me great pleasure to learn that
"the manner in which the Rev. Mr. Joseph Warton read the Communion
Service was remarkably awful," but it must be as an evidence that he
carried a "Gothick" manner into daily life.
The spirit of pedantry, so amicably mocked by the Wartons, took its
revenge upon Thomas in the form of a barren demon named Joseph Ritson,
who addressed to him in 1782 what he aptly called _A Familiar Letter_.
There is hardly a more ferocious pamphlet in the whole history of
literature. Ritson, who had the virulence of a hornet and the same
insect's inability to produce honey of his own, was considered by the
reactionaries to have "punched Tom Warton's historick body full of
deadly holes." But his strictures were not really important. In
marshalling some thousands of facts, Warton had made perhaps a couple of
dozen mistakes, and Ritson advances these with a reiteration and a
violence worthy of a maniac. Moreover, and this is the fate of angry
pedants, he himself is often found to be as dustily incorrect as Warton
when examined by modern lights. Ritson, who accuses Warton of "never
having consulted or even seen" the books he quotes from, and of
intentionally swindling the public, was in private life a vegetarian who
is said to have turned his orphan nephew on to the streets because he
caught him eating a mutton-chop. Ritson flung his arrows far and wide,
for he called Dr. Samuel Johnson himself "that great luminary, or rather
dark lantern of literature."
If we turn over Ritson's distasteful pages, it is only to obtain from
them further proof of the perception of Warton's Romanticism by an
adversary whom hatred made perspicacious. Ritson abuses the _History of
English Poetry_ for presuming to have "rescued from oblivion irregular
beauties" of which no one desired to be reminded. He charges Warton with
recommending the poetry of "our Pagan fathers" because it is untouched
by Christianity, and of saying that "religion and poetry are
incompatible." He accuses him of "constantly busying himself with
passages which he does not understand, because they appeal to his ear
or his fancy." "Old poetry," Ritson says to Warton, "is the same thing
to you, sense or nonsense." He dwells on Warton's marked attraction to
whatever is prodigious and impossible. The manner in which these
accusations are made is insolent and detestable; but Ritson had
penetration, and without knowing what he reached, in some of these
diatribes he pierced to the heart of the Romanticist fallacy.
It is needful that I should bring these observations to a close. I hope
I have made good my claim that it was the Wartons who introduced into
the discussion of English poetry the principle of Romanticism. To use a
metaphor of which both of them would have approved, that principle was
to them like the mystical bowl of ichor, the _ampolla_, which Astolpho
was expected to bring down from heaven in the _Orlando Furioso_. If I
have given you an exaggerated idea of the extent to which they foresaw
the momentous change in English literature, I am to blame. No doubt by
extracting a great number of slight and minute remarks, and by putting
them together, the critic may produce an effect which is too emphatic.
But you will be on your guard against such misdirection. It is enough
for me if you will admit the priority of the intuition of the brothers,
and I do not think that it can be contested.
Thomas Warton said, "I have rejected the ideas of men who are the most
distinguished ornaments" of the history of English poetry, and he
appealed against a "mechanical" attitude towards the art of poetry. The
brothers did more in rebelling against the Classic formulas than in
starting new poetic methods. There was an absence in them of "the pomps
and prodigality" of genius of which Gray spoke in a noble stanza. They
began with enthusiasm, but they had no native richness of expression, no
store of energy. It needed a nature as unfettered as Blake's, as wide
as Wordsworth's, as opulent as Keats's, to push the Romantic attack on
to victory. The instinct for ecstasy, ravishment, the caprices and
vagaries of emotion, was there; there was present in both brothers,
while they were still young, an extreme sensibility. The instinct was
present in them, but the sacred fire died out in the vacuum of their
social experience, and neither Warton had the energy to build up a style
in prose or verse. They struggled for a little while, and then they
succumbed to the worn verbiage of their age, from which it is sometimes
no light task to disengage their thought. In their later days they made
some sad defections, and I can never forgive Thomas Warton for arriving
at Marlowe's _Hero and Leander_ and failing to observe its beauties. We
are told that as Camden Professor he "suffered the rostrum to grow
cold," and he was an ineffective poet laureate. His brother Joseph felt
the necessity or the craving for lyrical expression, without attaining
more than a muffled and a second-rate effect.
All this has to be sadly admitted. But the fact remains that between
itself heard in Europe, the Wartons had discovered the fallacy of the
poetic theories admitted in their day, and had formed some faint
conception of a mode of escape from them. The Abbé Du Bos had laid down
in his celebrated _Réflexions_ (1719) that the poet's art consists of
making a general moral representation of incidents and scenes, and
embellishing it with elegant images. This had been accepted and acted
upon by Pope and by all his followers. To have been the first to
perceive the inadequacy and the falsity of a law which excluded all
imagination, all enthusiasm, and all mystery, is to demand respectful
attention from the historian of Romanticism, and this attention is due
to Joseph and Thomas Warton.
It is exactly two hundred years to-night since there was born, at
Clonmel, in Ireland, a son to a subaltern in an English regiment just
home from the Low Countries. "My birthday," Laurence Sterne tells us,
"was ominous to my poor father, who was, the day after our arrival, with
many other brave officers, broke and sent adrift into the wide world
with a wife and two children." The life of the new baby was one of
perpetual hurry and scurry; his mother, who had been an old campaigner,
daughter of what her son calls "a noted suttler" called Nuttle, had been
the widow of a soldier before she married Roger Sterne. In the
extraordinary fashion of the army of those days, the regiment was
hurried from place to place--as was that of the father of the infant
Borrow a century later--and with it hastened the unhappy Mrs. Sterne,
for ever bearing and for ever losing children, "most rueful journeys,"
marked by a long succession of little tombstones left behind. Finally,
at Gibraltar, the weary father, pugnacious to the last, picked a quarrel
about a goose and was pinked through the body, surviving in a thoroughly
damaged condition, to die, poor exhausted pilgrim of Bellona, in
barracks in Jamaica.
It would be difficult to imagine a childhood better calculated than this
to encourage pathos in a humorist and fun in a sentimentalist. His
account, in his brief autobiography, of the appearance and
disappearance of his hapless brothers and sisters is a proof of how
early life appealed to Laurence Sterne in the dappled colours of an
April day. We read there of how at Wicklow "we lost poor Joram, a pretty
boy"; how "Anne, that pretty blossom, fell in the barracks of Dublin";
how little Devijehar was "left behind" in Carrickfergus. We know not
whether to sob or to giggle, so tragic is the rapid catalogue of dying
babies, so ridiculous are their names and fates. Here, then, I think, we
have revealed to us the prime characteristic of Sterne, from which all
his other characteristics branch away, for evil or for good. As no other
writer since Shakespeare, and in a different and perhaps more intimate
way than even Shakespeare, he possessed the key of those tears that
succeed the hysteria of laughter, and of that laughter which succeeds
the passion of tears. From early childhood, and all through youth and
manhood, he had been collecting observations upon human nature in these
rapidly alternating moods.
He observed it in its frailty, but being exquisitely frail himself, he
was no satirist. A breath of real satire would blow down the whole
delicate fabric of _Tristram Shandy_ and the _Sentimental Journey_.
Sterne pokes fun at people and things; he banters the extravagance of
private humour; but it is always with a consciousness that he is himself
more extravagant than any one. If we compare him for a moment with
Richardson, who buttonholes the reader in a sermon; or with Smollett,
who snarls and bites like an angry beast; we feel at once that Sterne
could not breathe in the stuffiness of the one or in the tempest of the
other. Sympathy is the breath of his nostrils, and he cannot exist
except in a tender, merry relation with his readers. His own ideal,
surely, is that which he attributed to the fantastic and gentle Yorick,
who never could enter a village, but he caught the attention of old and
young. "Labour stood still as he passed; the bucket hung suspended in
the middle of the well; the spinning-wheel forgot its round, even
chuck-farthing and shuffle-cap themselves stood gaping till he had got
out of sight." Like Yorick, Sterne loved a jest in his heart.
There are, it seems to me, two distinct strains in the intellectual
development of Sterne, and I should like to dwell upon them for a
moment, because I think a lack of recognition of them has been apt to
darken critical counsel in the consideration of his writings. You will
remember that he was forty-six years of age before he took up the
business of literature seriously. Until that time he had been a country
parson in Yorkshire, carrying his body, that "cadaverous bale of goods,"
from Sutton to Stillington, and from Stillington to Skelton. He had
spent his life in riding, shooting, preaching, joking, and philandering
in company, and after a fashion, most truly reprehensible from a
clerical point of view, yet admirably fitted to prepare such an artist
for his destined labours as a painter of the oddities of average
Englishmen. But by the side of this indolent search after the enjoyment
of the hour, Sterne cultivated a formidable species of literature in
which he had so few competitors that, in after years, his indolence
prompted him to plagiarise freely from sources which, surely, no human
being would discover. He steeped himself in the cumbrous learning of
those writers of the Renaissance in whom congested Latin is found
tottering into colloquial French. He studied Rabelais perhaps more
deeply than any other Englishman of his time, and certainly Beroalde de
Verville, Bruscambille, and other absurdities of the sixteenth century
were familiar to him and to him alone in England.
Hence, when Sterne began to write, there were two streams flowing in his
brain, and these were, like everything else about him, inconsistent with
one another. The faithful tender colour of modern life competed with
the preposterous oddity of burlesque erudition. When he started the
annals of Tristram Shandy, the Rabelais vein was in the ascendant, and
there is plenty of evidence that it vastly dazzled and entertained
readers of that day. But it no longer entertains us very much, and it is
the source of considerable injustice done by modern criticism to the
real merits of Sterne. When so acute a writer as Bagehot condemns much
of _Tristram Shandy_ as "a sort of antediluvian fun, in which uncouth
saurian jokes play idly in an unintelligible world," he hits the nail on
the head of why so many readers nowadays turn with impatience from that
work. But they should persevere, for Sterne himself saw his error, and
gradually dropped the "uncouth saurian jokes" which he had filched out
of Burton and Beroalde, relying more and more exclusively on his own
rich store of observations taken directly from human nature. In the
adorable seventh volume of _Tristram_, and in _The Sentimental Journey_,
there is nothing left of Rabelais except a certain rambling artifice of
style.
The death of Sterne, at the age of fifty-four, is one of those events
which must be continually regretted, because to the very end of his life
he was growing in ease and ripeness, was discovering more perfect modes
of self-expression, and was purging himself of his compromising
intellectual frailties. It is true that from the very first his
excellences were patent. The portrait of my Uncle Toby, which Hazlitt
truly said is "one of the finest compliments ever paid to human nature,"
occurs, or rather begins, in the second volume of _Tristram Shandy_. But
the marvellous portraits which the early sections of that work contain
are to some extent obscured, or diluted, by the author's determination
to gain piquancy by applying old methods to new subjects. Frankly, much
as I love Sterne, I find Kunastrockius and Lithopaedus a bore. I suspect
they have driven more than one modern reader away from the enjoyment of
_Tristram Shandy_.
Towards the end of the eighteenth century a leading Dissenting minister,
the Rev. Joseph Fawcett, said in answer to a question: "Do I _like_
Sterne? Yes, to be sure I should deserve to be hanged if I didn't!" That
was the attitude of thoughtful and scrupulous people of cultivation more
than one hundred years ago. But it was their attitude only on some
occasions. There is no record of the fact, but I am ready to believe
that Mr. Fawcett may, with equal sincerity, have said that Sterne was a
godless wretch. We know that Bishop Warburton presented him with a purse
of gold, in rapturous appreciation of his talents, and then in a
different mood described him as "an irrevocable scoundrel." No one else
has ever flourished in literature who has combined such alternating
powers of attraction and repulsion. We like Sterne extremely at one
moment, and we dislike him no less violently at another. He is attar of
roses to-day and asafœtida to-morrow, and it is not by any means easy
to define the elements which draw us towards him and away from him. Like
Yorick, he had "a wild way of talking," and he wrote impetuously and
impudently "in the naked temper which a merry heart discovered." As he
"seldom shunned occasions of saying what came uppermost, and without
much ceremony, he had but too many temptations in life of scattering his
wit and his humour, his gibes and his jests, about him."
So that even if he had been merely Yorick, Sterne would have had
manifold opportunities of giving offence and causing scandal. But lie
was not only a humorist with "a thousand little sceptical notions to
defend," but he was a sentimentalist as well. Those two characteristics
he was constantly mingling, or trying to mingle, since sentimentality
and humour are in reality like oil and wine. He would exasperate his
readers by throwing his wig in their faces at the moment when they were
weeping, or put them out of countenance by ending a farcical story on a
melancholy note. A great majority of Englishmen like to be quite sure of
the tone of what they read; they wish an author to be straightforward;
they dread irony and they loathe impishness. Now Sterne is the most
impish of all imaginative writers. He is what our grandmothers, in
describing the vagaries of the nursery, used to call "a limb of Satan."
Tristram Shandy, in his light-hearted way, declared that "there's not so
much difference between good and evil as the world is apt to imagine."
No doubt that is so, but the world does not like its preachers to play
fast and loose with moral definitions.
The famous sensibility of Sterne was a reaction against the seriousness,
the ponderosity, of previous prose literature in England. We talk of the
heaviness of the eighteenth century, but the periods of even such
masters of solid rhetoric as Johnson and Gibbon are light as thistledown
in comparison with the academic prose of the seventeenth century. Before
the eighteenth century is called lumbering, let us set a page of Hume
against a page of Hobbes, or a passage out of Berkeley by a passage out
of Selden. Common justice is seldom done to the steady clarification of
English prose between 1660 and 1750, but it was kept within formal lines
until the sensitive recklessness of Sterne broke up the mould, and gave
it the flying forms of a cloud or a wave. He owed this beautiful
inspiration to what Nietzsche calls his "squirrel-soul," which leaped
from bough to bough, and responded without a trace of conventional
restraint to every gust of emotion. Well might Goethe be inspired to
declare that Sterne was the most emancipated spirit of his century.
His very emancipation gives us the reason why Sterne's admirers nowadays
are often divided in their allegiance to him. A frequent part of his
humour deals very flippantly with subjects that are what we have been
taught to consider indelicate or objectionable. It is worse than useless
to try to explain this foible of his away, because he was aware of it
and did it on purpose. He said that "nothing but the more gross and
carnal parts of a composition will go down." His indecency was objected
to in his own age, but not with any excluding severity. And I would like
to call your attention to the curious conventionality of our views on
this subject. Human nature does not change, but it changes its modes of
expression. In the eighteenth century very grave people, even bishops,
allowed themselves, in their relaxed moments, great licence in jesting.
Yet they would have been scandalised by the tragic treatment of sex by
our more audacious novelists of to-day. We are still interested in these
matters, but we have agreed not to joke about them. I read the other day
a dictum of one of those young gentlemen who act as our moral policemen:
he prophesied that a jest on a sexual subject would, in twenty years, be
not merely reprehensible, as it is now, but unintelligible. Very proper,
no doubt, only do not let us call this morality, it is only a change of
habits.
Sterne is not suited to readers who are disheartened at irrelevancy. It
is part of his charm, and it is at the same time his most whimsical
habit, never to proceed with his story when you expect him to do so, and
to be reminded by his own divagations of delightful side-issues which
lead you, entranced, whither you had no intention of going. He did not
merely not shun occasions of being irrelevant, but he sought them out
and eagerly cultivated them. Remember that a whole chapter of _Tristram_
is devoted to the _attitude_ of Corporal Trim as he prepared himself to
read the Sermon. Sterne kept a stable of prancing, plump little
hobby-horses, and he trotted them out upon every occasion. But this is
what makes his books the best conversational writing in the English
language. He writes for all the world exactly as though he were talking
at his ease, and we listen enchanted to the careless, frolicking, idle,
penetrating speaker who builds up for us so nonchalantly, with
persistent but unobtrusive touch upon touch, the immortal figures of Mr.
Shandy, my Uncle Toby, Trim, Yorick, the Widow Wadman, and so many more.
This, I am inclined to think, in drawing this brief sketch to an end, is
Sterne's main interest for ourselves. He broke up the rhetorical manner
of composition, or, rather, he produced an alternative manner which was
gradually accepted and is in partial favour still. I would ask you to
read for yourselves the scene of the ass who blocked the way for
Tristram at Lyons, and to consider how completely new that method of
describing, of facing a literary problem, was in 1765. I speak here to
an audience of experts, to a company of authors who are accustomed to a
close consideration of the workmanship of their _métier_. I ask them
where, at all events in English, anything like that scene had been found
before the days of Sterne. Since those days we have never been without
it.
To trace the Shandean influence down English literature for the last
century and a half would take me much too long for your patience. In
Dickens, in Carlyle, even in Ruskin, the Shandean element is often
present and not rarely predominant. None of those great men would have
expressed himself exactly as he does but for Laurence Sterne. And coming
down to our own time, I see the influence of Sterne everywhere. The
pathos of Sir James Barrie is intimately related to that of the creator
of Uncle Toby and Maria of Moulines, while I am not sure that of all the
books which Stevenson read it was not the _Sentimental Journey_ which
made the deepest impression upon him.
In the announcements of the approaching celebration of the centenary of
Poe in this country, the fact of his having been a poet was concealed.
Perhaps his admirers hoped that it might be overlooked, as without
importance, or condoned as the result of bad habits. At all events, the
statement that the revels on that occasion would be conducted by Sir
Arthur Conan Doyle was quite enough to prove that it was the prose
writer of "The Black Cat" and "The Murders in the Rue Morgue," and not
the verso writer of "Ulalume" and "Annabel Lee" who would be the centre
of attention. On that side of Poe's genius, therefore, although it is
illustrated by such masterpieces of sullen beauty as "The Fall of the
House of Usher" and such triumphs of fantastic ingenuity as "The Gold
Bug," I feel it needless to dwell here, the more as I think the
importance of these tales very slight by the side of that of the best
poems. Edgar Poe was, in my opinion, one of the most significant poetic
artists of a century rich in poetic artists, and I hold it to be for
this reason, and not because he wrote thrilling "detective" stories,
that he deserves persistent commemoration.
The dominance of Poe as an important poetic factor of the nineteenth
century has not been easily or universally admitted, and it is only
natural to examine both the phenomena and the causes of the objections
so persistently brought against it. In the first instance, if the fame
of Browning and Tennyson advanced slowly, it advanced firmly, and it
was encouraged from the beginning by the experts, by the cultivated
minority. Poe, on the other hand, was challenged, and his credentials
were grudgingly inspected, by those who represented the finest culture
of his own country, and the carpings of New England criticism are not
quite silent yet. When he died, in 1849, the tribunal of American
letters sat at Cambridge, in the neighbourhood of Boston, and it was
ill-prepared to believe that anything poetical could deserve salvation
if it proceeded from a place outside the magic circle. Edgar Poe, the
son of Irish strolling players, called "The Virginia Comedians," settled
in the South and was educated in England. By an odd coincidence, it now
appears that he actually was a native, as it were by accident, of Boston
itself. In the words of the Psalmist, "Lo! there was he born!" This
Gentile poet, such was the then state of American literature, could not
arrive on earth elsewhere than in the Jerusalem of Massachusetts. But
that concession was not known to the high priests, the Lowells, the
Holmeses, the Nortons, to whom Poe seemed a piratical intruder from
Javan or Gadire.
Nothing is so discouraging to a young poet of originality as to find
himself isolated. Everything new is regarded with suspicion and dislike
by the general world of readers, and usually by the leaders of criticism
as well. Yet the daring prophet feels supported if he has but his Aaron
and his Hur. In the generation that immediately preceded Poe, Wordsworth
and Coleridge had been derided, but they had enjoyed the emphatic
approbation of one another and of Southey. Shelley had been a pariah of
letters, yet he was cordially believed in by Byron and by Peacock. Even
Keats could shrink from the mud-storms of the Scotch reviewers behind
the confident zeal of Leigh Hunt and Reynolds. At a still later moment
Rossetti and Morris would shelter themselves securely, and even
serenely, from the obloquy of criticism, within a slender peel-tower of
the praise of friends. In all these cases there could be set against the
stupidity of the world at large the comfortable cleverness of a few
strong persons of taste, founded, as all good taste must be, upon
principles. The poet could pride himself on his eclecticism, on his
recognition within, as Keats said, "a little clan." But Poe's misfortune
was to have no clan of his own, and to be rejected by precisely those
persons who represented, and on the whole justly represented, good taste
in America.
His behaviour in this predicament was what might have been expected from
a man whose genius was more considerable than his judgment or his
manners. He tried, at first, to conciliate the New England authorities,
and he flattered not merely the greater planets but some of the very
little stars. He danced, a plaintive Salome, before Christopher P.
Cranch and Nathaniel P. Willis. When he found that his blandishments
were of no avail, he turned savage, and tried to prove that he did not
care, by being rude to Bryant and Longfellow. He called the whole solemn
Sanhedrim a college of Frog-pondian professors. Thus, of course, he
closed upon himself the doors of mercy, since the central aim and object
of the excellent men who at that time ruled American literature was to
prove that, in what this impertinent young man from Virginia called the
Frog Pond, the United States possessed its Athens and its Weimar, its
home of impeccable distinction. Indeed, but for the recognition of
Europe, which began to flow in richly just as Poe ceased to be able to
enjoy it, the prestige of this remarkable poet might have been
successfully annihilated.
Nor was it only the synod of Boston wits who issued the edict that he
should be ignored, but in England also many good judges of literature,
especially those who belonged to the intellectual rather than the
artistic class, could not away with him. I recollect hearing Leslie
Stephen say, now nearly thirty years ago, that to employ strong terms of
praise for Poe was "simply preposterous." And one whom I admire so
implicitly that I will not mention his name in a context which is not
favourable to his judgment, wrote (in his haste) of Poe's "singularly
valueless verses."
This opposition, modified, it is true, by the very different attitude
adopted by Tennyson and most subsequent English poets, as well as by
Baudelaire, Mallarmé and the whole younger school in France, was
obstinately preserved, and has not wholly subsided. It would be a
tactical mistake for those who wish to insist on Poe's supremacy in his
own line to ignore the serious resistance which has been made to it. In
the canonisation-trial of this whimsical saint, the Devil's advocates,
it may be confessed, are many, and their objections are imposing. It is
possible that local pique and a horror of certain crude surroundings may
have had something to do with the original want of recognition in New
England, but such sources of prejudice would be ephemeral. There
remained, and has continued to remain, in the very essence of Poe's
poetry, something which a great many sincere and penetrating lovers of
verse cannot endure to admit as a dominant characteristic of the art.
To recognise the nature of this quality is to take the first step
towards discovering the actual essence of Poe's genius. His detractors
have said that his verses are "singularly valueless." It is therefore
necessary to define what it is they mean by "value." If they mean an
inculcation, in beautiful forms, of moral truth; if they mean a
succession of ideas, clothed in exalted and yet definite language; if
they are thinking of what stirs the heart in reading parts of _Hamlet_
and _Comus_, of what keeps the pulse vibrating after the "Ode to Duty"
has been recited; then the verses of Poe are indeed without value. A
poet less gnomic than Poe, one from whom less, as they say in the
suburbs, "can be learned," is scarcely to be found in the whole range of
literature. His lack of curiosity about moral ideas is so complete that
evil moves him no more than good. There have been writers of eccentric
or perverse morality who have been so much irritated by the preaching of
virtue that they have lent their genius to the recommendation of vice.
This inversion of moral fervour is perhaps the source of most that is
vaguely called "immoral" in imaginative literature. But Edgar Poe is as
innocent of immorality as he is of morality. No more innocuous flowers
than his are grown through the length and breadth of Parnassus. There is
hardly a phrase in his collected writings which has a bearing upon any
ethical question, and those who look for what Wordsworth called "chains
of valuable thoughts" must go elsewhere.
In 1840 they might, in New England, go to Bryant, to Emerson, to
Hawthorne; and it is more than excusable that those who were
endeavouring to refine the very crude community in the midst of which
they were anxiously holding up the agate lamp of Psyche, should see
nothing to applaud in the vague and shadowy rhapsodies then being issued
by a dissipated hack in Philadelphia. What the New England critics
wanted, patriotically as well as personally, was as little like
"Ulalume" as can possibly be conceived. They defined what poetry should
be--there was about that time a mania for defining poetry--and what
their definition was may be seen no less plainly in the American _Fable
for Critics_ than in the preface to the English _Philip van Artevelde_.
It was to be picturesque, intellectual, pleasing; it was to deal, above
all, with moral "truths"; it was to avoid vagueness and to give no
uncertain sound; it was to regard "passion" with alarm, as the siren
which was bound sooner or later to fling a bard upon the rocks. It is
not necessary to treat this conception of poetry with scorn, nor to
reject principles of precise thought and clear, sober language, which
had been illustrated by Wordsworth in the present and by Gray in the
past. The ardent young critics of our own age, having thrown off all
respect for the traditions of literature, speak and write as if to them,
and them alone, had been divinely revealed the secrets of taste. They do
not give themselves time to realise that in Apollo's house there are
many mansions.
It is sufficient for us to note here that the discomfort of Poe's
position resided in the fact that he was not admitted into so much as
the forecourt of the particular mansion inhabited by Bryant and Lowell.
There is a phrase in one of his own rather vague and "valueless" essays
(for Poe was a poor critic) which, as it were accidentally, describes
his ideal in poetry, although it is not his own verse of which he is
speaking. He described--in 1845, when his ripe genius had just brought
forth "The Raven"--the poetic faculty as producing "a sense of dreamy,
wild, indefinite, and he would perhaps say, indefinable delight." This
shadowy but absorbing and mastering pleasure impregnated his own best
writings to such a degree that it gives us the measure of his unlikeness
to his contemporaries, and states the claim of his individuality.
Without precisely knowing it or perceiving his revolution, in an age of
intelligent, tame, lucid and cautiously-defined poetry, Edgar Poe
expressed the emotions which surged within him in numbers that were,
even to excess, "dreamy, wild, indefinite and indefinable."
His early verses are remarkably exempt from the influences which we
might expect to find impressed on them. He imitated, as every man of
genuine originality imitates while he learns his trade, but his models
were not, as might have been anticipated, Coleridge and Shelley; they
were Byron and Scott. In the poetry of Byron and Scott, Poe found
nothing to transfer to his own nature, and the early imitations,
therefore, left no trace on him. Brief as is the volume of his poems,
half of it might be discarded without much regret. Scattered among his
Byron and Scott imitations, however, we find a few pieces which reveal
to us that, while he was still almost a child, the true direction of his
genius was occasionally revealed to him. The lyric "To Helen," which is
said to have been composed in his fourteenth year, is steeped in the
peculiar purity, richness and vagueness which were to characterise his
mature poems:--
"On desperate seas long wont to roam,
Thy hyacinth hair, thy classic face,
Thy Naiad airs have brought me home
To the glory that was Greece,
And the grandeur that was Rome."
This was not published, however, until the author was two-and-twenty,
and it may have been touched up. Here is a fragment of a suppressed
poem, "Visit of the Dead," which Poe certainly printed in his eighteenth
year:--
"The breeze, the breath of God, is still,
And the mist upon the hill,
Shadowy, shadowy, yet unbroken,
Is a symbol and a token;
How it hangs upon the trees,
A mystery of mysteries!"
This is not so perfect, but it is even more than "To Helen" symptomatic
of Poe's peculiar relation to the poetic faculty as fostering a state of
indefinite and indeed indefinable delight. And from these faint
breathings how direct is the advance to such incomparable specimens of
symbolic fancy as "The City in the Sea," "The Sleeper," and finally
"Ulalume"!
The determination to celebrate, in a minor key, indefinite and
melancholy symbols of fancy, is a snare than which none more dangerous
can be placed in the path of a feeble foot. But Poe was not feeble, and
he was protected, and permanent value was secured for his poetry, by the
possession of one or two signal gifts to which attention must now be
paid. He cultivated the indefinite, but, happily for us, in language so
definite and pure that when he succeeds it is with a cool fulness, an
absence of all fretting and hissing sound, such as can rarely be
paralleled in English literature. The finest things in Milton's 1645
volume, Wordsworth at his very best, Tennyson occasionally, Collins in
some of his shorter odes, have reached that perfection of syllabic
sweetness, that clear sound of a wave breaking on the twilight sands,
which Poe contrives to render, without an effort, again and again:--
"By a route obscure and lonely,
Haunted by ill angels only,
On a black throne reigns upright,
I have reached these lands but newly
From an ultimate dim Thule,
From a wild weird clime, that lieth, sublime.
Out of space, out of time."
The present moment is one in which the reaction against plastic beauty
in poetry has reached such a height that it is almost vain to appeal
against it. There is scarcely a single English poet of consequence in
the younger school who does not treat the strings of his lyre as though
he were preluding with a slate-pencil upon a slate. That this is done
purposely, and in accordance with mysterious harmonic laws entirely
beyond the comprehension of ordinary ears, makes the matter worse. There
is no heresiarch so dangerous as the priest of holy and self-abnegating
life, and it is to a poet no less learned than Mr. Robert Bridges, that
the twentieth century seems to owe the existing rage for cacophony. He
holds something of the same place in relation to Swinburne and Poe, that
Donne did to Spenser three hundred years ago. In this condition of
things it may seem useless to found any claim for Poe on the ground of
the exquisite mellifluousness of his versification. We may hope,
however, some day to regain the use of our ears, and to discover once
more that music and metre are utterly distinct arts. When that
re-discovery has been made, Poe will resume his position as one of the
most uniformly melodious of all those who have used the English
language.
Critics who have admitted the extraordinary perfection of his prosody
have occasionally objected that in the most popular examples of it, "The
Raven" and "The Bells," he obtains his effect by a trick. It might be
objected, with equal force, that Victor Hugo in "Les Djinns" and even
Tennyson in "The Lotus Eaters" made use of "tricks." On the other hand,
if the charge be deserved, it seems odd that in the course of nearly
seventy years no other juggler or conjurer has contrived to repeat the
wonderful experiment. In each poem there are what must be judged
definite errors against taste in detail--Poe's taste was never very
sure--but the skill of the long voluptuous lamentation, broken at equal
intervals by the croak of the raven, and that of the verbal translation,
as if into four tones or languages, of the tintinabulation of the bells,
is so extraordinary, so original, and so closely in keeping with the
personal genius of the writer, that it is surely affectation to deny its
value.
It is not, however, in "The Bells" or in "The Raven," marvellous as are
these _tours de force_, that we see the essential greatness of Poe
revealed. The best of his poems are those in which he deals less
boisterously with the sentiment of mystery. During the latest months of
his unhappy life, he composed three lyrics which, from a technical
point of view, must be regarded not only as the most interesting, which
he wrote, but as those which have had the most permanent effect upon
subsequent literature, not in England merely, but in France. These are
"Ulalume," "Annabel Lee," "For Annie." One of Poe's greatest inventions
was the liquidation of stanzaic form, by which he was able to mould it
to the movements of emotion without losing its essential structure. Many
poets had done this with the line; it was left for Poe to do it with the
stanza. In the three latest lyrics this stanzaic legerdemain is
practised with an enchanting lightness, an ecstasy of sinuous and
elastic grace. Perhaps, had it been subjected to the poet's latest
revision, "For Annie" would have been the most wonderful of all in the
sensitive response of its metre to the delicate fluctuations of
sentiment.
We may, then, briefly summarise that Poe's first claim to commemoration
is that he was the pioneer in restoring to the art of poetry a faculty
which it had almost lost in its attempt to compete with science and
philosophy. It had become the aim of the poets to state facts; it was
given to Poe to perceive that no less splendid a future lay before those
who only hinted feelings. He was the earliest modern poet who
substituted the symbol for the exact description of an object or an
event. That "expression directe," about which the French have been
debating for the last quarter of a century, and over which M. Adolphe
Retté and M. Albert Mockel periodically dispute like Fathers of the
Church, was perceived and was deliberately repudiated by Poe eighty
years ago. He was deeply impregnated with the sense that the harmony of
imagination is not destroyed, but developed, by drawing over a subject
veil after veil of suggestion. His native temperament aided him in his
research after the symbol. He was naturally a cultivator of terror, one
who loved to people the world with strange and indefinable powers. His
dreams were innocent and agitating, occupied with supernatural terrors,
weighed upon by the imminence of shadowy presentments. He trembled at he
knew not what; in this he was related to the earliest poets of the
world, and in his perpetual recurrence to symbol he recalls the action
of their alarms.
The cardinal importance, then, of Poe as a poet is that he restored to
poetry a primitive faculty of which civilisation seemed successfully to
have deprived her. He rejected the doctrinal expression of positive
things, and he insisted upon mystery and symbol. He endeavoured to
clothe unfathomable thoughts and shadowy images in melody that was like
the wind wandering over the strings of an æolian harp. In other words,
he was the pioneer of a school which has spread its influence to the
confines of the civilised world, and is now revolutionising literature.
He was the discoverer and the founder of Symbolism.
One hundred and twenty years have nearly passed since the birth of
Bulwer-Lytton, and he continues to be suspended in a dim and ambiguous
position in the history of our literature. He combined extraordinary
qualities with fatal defects. He aimed at the highest eminence, and
failed to reach it, but he was like an explorer, who is diverted from
the main ascent of a mountain, and yet annexes an important table-land
elsewhere. Bulwer-Lytton never secured the ungrudging praise of the best
judges, but he attained great popularity, and has even now not wholly
lost it. He is never quoted as one of our great writers, and yet he
holds a place of his own from which it is improbable that he will ever
be dislodged. Although he stood out prominently among his fellows, and
although his career was tinged with scandal and even with romance, very
little has been known about him. Curiosity has been foiled by the
discretion of one party and the malignity of another. The public has not
been in a position to know the truth, nor to possess the real portrait
of a politician and a man of letters who has been presented as an angel
and as a gargoyle, but never as a human being. Forty years after his
death the candour and the skill of his grandson reveal him to us at last
in a memoir of unusual excellence.
In no case would Lord Lytton's task have been an easy one, but it must
have been made peculiarly difficult by the work of those who had
preceded him. Of these, the only one who deserves serious attention is
Robert Lytton, who published certain fragments in 1883. That the son
wished to support the memory of his father is unquestionable. But it is
difficult to believe that he intended his contribution to be more than
an aid to some future biographer's labour. He scattered his material
about him in rough heaps. Apart from the "Literary Remains," which
destroyed the continuity of even such brief biography as he gave, Robert
Lytton introduced a number of chapters which are more or less of the
nature of essays, and are often quite foreign to his theme. Moreover, he
dedicated several chapters to literary criticism of his father's works.
It is, in fact, obvious to any one who examines the two volumes of 1883
which Robert Lytton contrived to fill, that he was careful to contribute
as little as he possibly could to the story which he had started out to
relate. Although there is much that is interesting in the memoirs of
reason is, no doubt, that Robert Lytton stood too close to his parents,
had seen too much of their disputes, was too much torn by the agonies of
his own stormy youth, and was too sensitively conscious of the scandal,
to tell the story at all. We have the impression that, in order to
forestall any other biography, he pretended himself to write a book
which he was subtle enough to make unintelligible.
This baffling discretion, this feverish race from hiding-place to
hiding-place, has not only not been repeated by Lord Lytton in the new
_Life_, but the example of his father seems to have positively
emphasised his own determination to be straightforward and lucid. I know
no modern biography in which the writer has kept more rigidly to the
business of his narrative, or has less successfully been decoyed aside
by the sirens of family vanity. It must have been a great difficulty to
the biographer to find his pathway cumbered by the volumes of 1883, set
by his father as a plausible man-trap for future intruders. Lord
Lytton, however, is the one person who is not an intruder, and he was
the only possessor of the key which his father had so diplomatically
hidden. His task, however, was further complicated by the circumstance
that Bulwer-Lytton himself left in MS. an autobiography, dealing very
fully with his own career and character up to the age of twenty-two. The
redundancy of all the Lyttons is amazing. Bulwer-Lytton would not have
been himself if he had not overflowed into reflections which swelled his
valuable account of his childhood into monstrous proportions. Lord
Lytton, who has a pretty humour, tells an anecdote which will be read
with pleasure:--
"An old woman, who had once been one of Bulwer-Lytton's trusted
domestic servants, is still living in a cottage at Knebworth. One
day she was talking to me about my grandfather, and inadvertently
used an expression which summed him up more perfectly than any
elaborate description could have done. She was describing his house
at Copped Hall, where she had been employed as caretaker, and
added: 'In one of his attacks of _fluency_, I nursed him there for
many weeks.' 'Pleurisy,' I believe, was what she meant."
The bacillus of "_fluency_" interpenetrates the Autobiography, the
letters, the documents of every kind, and at any moment this disease
will darken Bulwer-Lytton's brightest hours. But curtailed by his
grandson, and with its floral and heraldic ornaments well pared away,
the Autobiography is a document of considerable value. It is written
with deliberate candour, and recalls the manner of Cobbett, a writer
with whom we should not expect to find Bulwer-Lytton in sympathy. It is
probable that the author of it never saw himself nor those who
surrounded him in precisely their true relation. There was something
radically twisted in his image of life, which always seems to have
passed through a refracting surface on its way to his vision. No doubt
this is more or less true of all experience; no power has given us the
gift "to see ourselves as others see us." But in the case of
Bulwer-Lytton this refractive habit of his imagination produced a
greater swerving aside from positive truth than is usual. The result is
that an air of the fabulous, of the incredible, is given to his
narratives, and often most unfairly.
A close examination, in fact, of the Autobiography results in confirming
the historic truth of it. What is surprising is not, when we come to
consider them, the incidents themselves, but Bulwer-Lytton's odd way of
narrating them. Lord Lytton, without any comment, provides us with
curious material for the verification of his grandfather's narrative. He
prints, here and there, letters from entirely prosaic persons which
tally, often to a surprising degree, with the extravagant statements of
Bulwer-Lytton. To quote a single instance, of a very remarkable
character, Bulwer-Lytton describes the effect his scholarship produced,
at the age of seventeen, upon sober, elderly people, who were dazzled
with his accomplishments and regarded him as a youthful prodigy. It is
the sort of confession, rather full-blooded and lyrical, which we might
easily set down to that phenomenon of refraction. But Lord Lytton prints
a letter from Dr. Samuel Parr (whom, by the way, he calls "a man of
sixty-four," but Parr, born in 1747, was seventy-four in 1821), which
confirms the autobiographer's account in every particular. The aged Whig
churchman, who boasted a wider knowledge of Greek literature than any
other scholar of his day, and whose peremptory temper was matter of
legend, could write to this Tory boy a long letter of enthusiastic
criticism, and while assuring Bulwer-Lytton that he kept "all the
letters with which you have honoured me," could add: "I am proud of
such a correspondent; and, if we lived nearer to each other, I should
expect to be very happy indeed in such a friend." Letters of this kind,
judiciously printed by Lord Lytton in his notes, serve to call us back
from the nebulous witchcraft in which Bulwer-Lytton was so fond of
wrapping up the truth, and to remind us that, in spite of the
necromancer, the truth is there.
From the point where the fragment of autobiography closes, although for
some time much the same material is used and some of the same letters
are quoted, as were quoted and used by Robert Lytton, the presentation
of these is so different that the whole effect is practically one of
novelty. But with the year 1826, when Edward Bulwer-Lytton, at the age
of three-and-twenty, became engaged to Rosina Doyle Wheeler, all is
positively new. The story of the marriage, separation, and subsequent
relations has never before been presented to the world with any approach
to accuracy or fulness. No biographical notices of Bulwer-Lytton even
touch on this subject, which has been hitherto abandoned to the gossip
of irresponsible contemporaries. It is true that a Miss Devey composed a
"Life of Rosina, Lady Lytton," in which the tale was told. This work was
immediately suppressed, and is inaccessible to the public; but the only
person who is known to be familiar with its contents reports that it
"contains fragments of the narrative, obviously biassed, wholly
inaccurate, and evidently misleading." So far as the general public is
concerned, Lord Lytton's impartial history of the relations between his
grandfather and his grandmother is doubtless that portion of his book
which will be regarded as the most important. I may, therefore, dwell
briefly upon his treatment of it.
The biographer, in dealing with a subject of this incalculable
difficulty, could but lay himself open to the censure of those who
dislike the revelation of the truth on any disagreeable subject. This
lion, however, stood in the middle of his path, and he had either to
wrestle with it or to turn back. Lord Lytton says in his preface that it
was necessary to tell all or nothing of the matrimonial adventures of
his grandparents, but, in reality, this was not quite the alternative,
which was to tell the truth or to withdraw from the task of writing a
Life of Bulwer-Lytton. The marriage and its results were so predominant
in the career of the man, and poisoned it so deeply to the latest hour
of his consciousness, that to attempt a biography of him without clear
reference to them would have been like telling the story of Nessus the
Centaur without mentioning the poisoned arrow of Heracles. But Lord
Lytton shall give his own apology:--
"As it was impossible to give a true picture of my grandfather
without referring to events which overshadowed his whole life, and
which were already partially known to the public, I decided to tell
the whole story as fully and as accurately as possible, in the firm
belief that the truth can damage neither the dead nor the living.
The steps which led to the final separation between my
grandparents, and the forces which brought about so disastrous a
conclusion of a marriage of love, apart from their biographical
interest, afford a study of human nature of the utmost value; and
so great are the moral lessons which this story contains, that I
venture to hope that the public may find in much that is tragic and
pitiful much also that is redeeming, and that the ultimate verdict
of posterity may be that these two unfortunate people did not
suffer entirely in vain."
His story, therefore, is not written with any partiality, and it seems
to be as full and as truthful as the ample materials at the author's
disposal permitted. The reader will conjecture that Lord Lytton could
have given many more details, but apart from the fact that they would
often have been wholly unfit for publication, it is difficult to see
that they would in any degree have altered the balance of the story, or
modified our judgment, which is quite sufficiently enlightened by the
copious letters on both sides which are now for the first time printed.
Voltaire has remarked of love that it is "de toutes les passions la plus
forte, parce qu'elle attaque, à la fois, la tête, le cœur, le corps."
It is a commonplace to say that Edward Bulwer's whole career might have
been altered if he had never met Rosina Wheeler, because this is true in
measure of every strong juvenile attachment: but it is rarely indeed so
copiously or so fatally true as it was in his case. His existence was
overwhelmed by this event; it was turned topsy-turvey, and it never
regained its equilibrium. In this adventure all was exaggerated; there
was excess of desire, excess of gratification, an intense weariness, a
consuming hatred.
On the first evening when the lovers met, in April 1826, an observer,
watching them as they talked, reflected that Bulwer's "bearing had that
aristocratic something bordering on _hauteur_" which reminded the
onlooker "of the passage, 'Stand back; I am holier than thou!'" The same
observer, dazzled, like the rest of the world, by the loveliness of Miss
Wheeler, judged that it would be best "to regard her as we do some
beautiful caged wild creature of the woods--at a safe and secure
distance." It would have preserved a chance of happiness for
Bulwer-Lytton to possess something of this stranger's clairvoyance. It
was not strange perhaps, but unfortunate, that he did not notice--or
rather that he was not repelled by, for he did notice--the absence of
moral delicacy in the beautiful creature, the radiant and seductive
Lamia, who responded so instantly to his emotion. He, the most
fastidious of men, was not offended by the vivacity of a young lady who
called attention to the vulgarity of her father's worsted stockings and
had none but words of abuse for her mother. These things, indeed,
disconcerted the young aristocrat, but he put them down to a lack of
training; he persuaded himself that these were superficial blemishes and
could be remedied; and he resigned his senses to the intoxication of
Rosina's beauty.
At first--and indeed to the last--she stimulated his energy and his
intellect. His love and his hatred alike spurred him to action. In
August 1826, in spite of the violent opposition of his mother, he and
Rosina were betrothed. By October Mrs. Bulwer had so far prevailed that
the engagement was broken off, and Edward tossed in a whirlpool of
anger, love, and despair. It took the form of such an attack of
"fluency" as was never seen before or after. Up to that time he had been
an elegant although feverish idler. Now he plunged into a strenuous life
of public and private engagements. He prepared to enter the House of
Commons; he finished _Falkland_, his first novel; he started the
composition of _Pelham_ and of another "light prose work," which may
have disappeared; he achieved a long narrative in verse, _O'Neill, or
the Rebel_; and he involved himself in literary projects without bound
and without end. The aim of all this energy was money. It is true that
he had broken off his betrothal; but it was at first only a pretence at
estrangement, to hoodwink his mother. He was convinced that he could not
live without possessing Rosina, and as his mother held the strings of
the common purse, he would earn his own income and support a wife.
Mrs. Bulwer-Lytton, who had a Roman firmness, was absolutely determined
that her son should not marry "a penniless girl whose education had been
so flagrantly neglected, who was vain and flighty, with a mocking humour
and a conspicuous lack of principle." At this point the story becomes
exceedingly interesting. A Balzac would strip it of its romantic
trappings, and would penetrate into its physiology. Out of Rosina's
sight, and diverted by the excess of his literary labours, Edward's
infatuation began to decline. His mother, whose power of character would
have been really formidable if it had been enforced by sympathy or even
by tact, relaxed her opposition; and instantly her son, himself, no
longer attacked, became calmer and more clear-sighted. Rosina's faults
were patent to his memory; the magic of her beauty less invincible.
Within a month all was changed again. Rosina fretted herself into what
she contrived to have reported to Bulwer-Lytton as an illness. She
begged for an interview, and he went with reluctance to bid her farewell
for ever. It was Bulwer-Lytton's habit to take with him a masterpiece of
literature upon every journey. It seems unfortunate that on this
occasion _The Tempest_ was not his companion, for it might have warned
him, as Prospero warned Ferdinand, against the fever in the blood:--
"No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall
To make this contract grow; but barren hate,
Sour-eyed disdain, and discord, shall bestrew
The union of your bed, with weeds so loathly
That you shall hate it, both."
When his short interview, which was to have been a final one, was over,
that had happened which made a speedy marriage necessary, whatever the
consequences might be.
The new conditions were clearly stated to old Mrs. Bulwer-Lytton, but
that formidable lady belonged to an earlier generation, and saw no
reason for Quixotic behaviour. Her conscience had been trained in the
eighteenth century, and all her blame was for Rosina Wheeler. Torn
between his duty and his filial affection, Bulwer-Lytton now passed
through a period of moral agony. He wrote to his mother: "I am far too
wretched, and have had too severe a contest with myself, not to look to
the future rather with despondency than pleasure, and the view you take
of the matter is quite enough to embitter my peace of mind." Miss
Wheeler, not unnaturally stung to anger, used disrespectful expressions
regarding Mrs. Bulwer-Lytton, and these bickerings filled the lover and
son with indignation. His life, between these ladies, grew to be hardly
worth living, and in the midst of one such crisis this brilliant young
dandy of four-and-twenty wrote:--"I feel more broken-hearted,
despondent, and sated than any old valetudinarian who has seen all his
old hopes and friends drop off one by one, and finds himself left for
the rest of his existence to the solitary possession of gloom and gout."
Mrs. Bulwer-Lytton fought fiercely to the last, and Edward determined to
close the matter; on August 29th, 1827, he married Rosina.
At first, in spite of, and even because of, the wild hostility of his
mother, the marriage seemed successful. The rage of the mother drove the
husband to the wife. Lord Lytton has noted that in later years all that
his grandfather and his grandmother said about one another was
unconsciously biassed by their memory of later complications. Neither
Bulwer-Lytton nor Rosina could give an accurate history of their
relations at the beginning, because the mind of each was prejudiced by
their knowledge of the end. Each sought to justify the hatred which both
had lived to feel, by representing the other as hateful from the first.
But the letters survive, and the recollections of friends, to prove that
this was entirely untrue. It must be admitted that their union was never
based upon esteem, but wholly upon passion, and that from the first they
lacked that coherency of relation, in moral respects, which was needed
to fix their affections. But those who have dimly heard how bitterly
these two unfortunate people hated one another in later life will be
astonished to learn that they spent the two first years together like
infatuated turtle-doves.
Their existence was romantic and absurd. Cut off from all support by the
implacable anger of old Mrs. Bulwer-Lytton, they depended on a combined
income of £380 a year and whatever the husband could make to increase
it. Accordingly they took a huge country house, Woodcot in Oxon, and
lived at the rate of several thousands a year. There they basked in an
affluent splendour of bad taste which reminds us of nothing in the world
so much as of those portions of _The Lady Flabella_ which Mrs.
Wititterly was presently to find so soft and so voluptuous. The
following extract from one of Rosina's lively letters-and she was a very
sprightly correspondent--gives an example of her style, of her husband's
Pelhamish extravagance, and of the gaudy recklessness of their manner of
life. They had now been married nearly two years:--
"How do you think my audacious husband has spent his time since he
has been in town? Why, he must needs send me down what he termed a
little Christmas box, which was a huge box from Howel and James's,
containing only eight Gros de Naples dresses of different colours
not made up, four Gros des Indes, two merino ones, four satin ones,
an amber, a black, a white and a blue, eight pocket handkerchiefs
that look as if they had been spun out of lilies and air and
_brodée_ by the fairies, they are so exquisitely fine and so
beautifully worked. Four pieces (16 yards in each) of beautiful
white blonde, two broad pieces and two less broad, a beautiful and
very large blue real cashmere shawl, a Chantilly veil that would
reach from this to Dublin, and six French long pellerines very
richly embroidered on the finest India muslin, three dozen pair of
white silk stockings, one dozen of black, a most beautiful black
satin cloak with very pretty odd sort of capes and trimmed round
and up the sides with a very broad band of a new kind of figured
plush--I forget what they call it (it came from Paris), and a hat
of the same--such a hat as can only be made in the Rue Vivienne.
You would think that this 'little Christmas box' would have been
enough to have lasted for some time. However, he thought
differently, for on New Year's morning before I was out of bed,
there came a parcel by the mail, which on opening proved to be a
large red Morocco case containing a bright gold chain, a yard and a
half long, with the most beautiful and curious cross to it that I
ever saw--the chain is as thick as my dead gold necklace, and you
may guess what sort of a thing it is when I tell you that I took it
to a jeweller here to have it weighed, and it weighed a pound all
but an ounce. The man said it never was made for less than fifty
guineas, but that he should think it had cost more."
Rosina, who has only £80 a year of her own, will not be outdone, and
cannot "resist ordering" Edward "a gold toilette, which he has long
wished for.... Round the rim of the basin and the handle of the ewer I
have ordered a wreath of _narcissus_ in dead gold, which, for Mr.
Pelham, you'll own, is not a bad idea."
It would be expected that all this crazy display would lead the young
couple rapidly and deeply into debt. That it did not do so is the most
curious phase of the story. Bulwer-Lytton immediately, and apparently
without the slightest difficulty, developed a literary industry the
sober record of which approaches the fabulous. Walter Scott alone may be
held to have equalled it. The giants of popular fiction did, indeed,
enjoy larger single successes than Bulwer-Lytton did, but none of them,
not Dickens himself, was so uniformly successful. Everything he wrote
sold as though it were bread displayed to a hungry crowd. Even his
poetry, so laboriously and lifelessly second-hand, always sold. He did
not know what failure was; he made money by _Devereux_; even _The New
Timon_ went into many editions. To earn what was required, however--and
in these early years he seems to have made £3000 his minimum of needful
return--to live in the insane style which his wife and he demanded, an
enormous nervous strain was required. Edward Bulwer-Lytton's temper had
always been warm and eager; it now grew irritable to the highest degree.
His mother continued to exasperate him; his wife suddenly failed to
please him; his health waned; and he became the most miserable of men;
yet without ceasing for a moment to be the most indefatigable of
authors. The reader will follow the evolution of the tragedy, which is
of poignant interest, in Lord Lytton's pages. The whole story is one of
the most extraordinary in the history of literature.
It has been a feature of Bulwer-Lytton's curious posthumous fortune that
he has seemed solitary in his intellectual if not in his political and
social action. We think of him as one of those morose and lonely bees
that are too busy gathering pollen to join the senate of the hive, and
are dwellers in the holes of the rocks. It is quite true that, with a
painful craving for affection, he had not the genius of friendship. The
general impression given by his biography is one of isolation; in "the
sea of life" he was one of those who are most hopelessly "enisled."
Nothing is sadder than this severance of a delicate and sensitive
temperament from those who surround it closely and to whom it stretches
out its arms in vain. But a careful reading of these interesting volumes
leaves us in no doubt of the cause of this loneliness. Bulwer-Lytton,
with all his ardour and his generosity, was devoid of the gift of
sympathy. In characters of a simpler mould a natural kindliness may take
the place of comprehension. But Bulwer-Lytton had a lively and protean
fancy which perpetually deceived him. In human relations he was always
moving, but always on the wrong track.
The letters to his mother, to his wife, to his son, exemplify this
unfortunate tendency. They are eloquent, they are even too eloquent, for
Bulwer-Lytton intoxicated himself with his own verbosity; they are meant
to be kind, they are meant to be just, they are meant to be wise and
dignified and tender; but we see, in Lord Lytton's impartial narrative,
that they scarcely ever failed to exasperate the receiver. His dealings
with his son, of whom he was exquisitely proud and sensitively fond, are
of the saddest character, because of the father's want of comprehension,
haste of speech and intolerance of temper. The very fact that a son, a
wife, or a mother could with impunity be addressed in terms of
exaggerated sensibility, because there could be no appeal, was a snare
to the too-ready pen of Bulwer-Lytton, which, poured out its oceans of
ink without reflection and without apprehension. If violent offence were
given, the post went out again later in the day, and equally violent
self-humiliation would restore the emotional balance. But what could not
be restored was the sense of confidence and domestic security.
In his contact with other literary men of his own age more restraint was
necessary, and we learn from Lord Lytton's pages of valuable and
prolonged acquaintanceships which were sometimes almost friendships. His
company was much sought after, and occasionally by very odd persons.
Lord Lytton prints a series of most diverting letters from the notorious
Harriette Wilson, who, in spite of the terror into which her "Memoirs"
had thrown society, desired to add the author of _Pelham_ to the aviary
of her conquests. But the snare was set in vain before the eyes of so
shrewd a bird as Bulwer-Lytton; he declined to see the lady, but he kept
her amazing letters. This was in 1829, when the novelist seems to have
had no literary or political associates. But by 1831, we find him
editing the _New Monthly Magazine_, and attaching himself to Lord
Melbourne and Lord Durham on the one hand and to Disraeli and Dickens on
the other. When to these we have added Lady Blessington and Letitia
Landon, we have mentioned all those public persons with whom
Bulwer-Lytton seems to have been on terms of intimacy during his early
manhood. All through these years he was an incessant diner-out and
party-goer, and the object of marvellous adulation, but he passed
through all this social parade as though it had been a necessary portion
of the exterior etiquette of life. Why he fatigued himself by these
formal exercises, in which he seems to have found no pleasure, it is
impossible to conceive, but a sense of the necessity of parade was
strangely native to him.
He had, however, one close and constant friend. John Forster was by far
the most intimate of all his associates throughout his career.
Bulwer-Lytton seems to have met him first about 1834, when he was
twenty-eight and Forster only twenty-two. In spite of this disparity in
age, the younger man almost at once took a tone of authority such as the
elder seldom permitted in an acquaintance. Forster had all the gifts
which make a friend valuable. He was rich in sympathy and resource, his
temper was reasonable, he comprehended a situation, he knew how to hold
his own in argument and yet yield with grace. Lord Lytton prints a very
interesting character-sketch of Forster, which he has found among his
grandfather's MSS. It is a tribute which does equal credit to him who
makes it and to him of whom it is made:--
"John Forster.... A most sterling man, with an intellect at once
massive and delicate. Few, indeed, have his strong practical sense
and sound judgment; fewer still unite with such qualities his
exquisite appreciation of latent beauties in literary art. Hence,
in ordinary life, there is no safer adviser about literary work,
especially poetry; no more refined critic. A large heart naturally
accompanies so masculine an understanding. He has the rare capacity
for affection which embraces many friendships without loss of depth
or warmth in one. Most of my literary contemporaries are his
intimate companions, and their jealousies of each other do not
diminish their trust in him. More than any living critic, he has
served to establish reputations. Tennyson and Browning owed him
much in their literary career. Me, I think, he served in that way
less than any of his other friends. But, indeed, I know of no
critic to whom I have been much indebted for any position I hold in
literature. In more private matters I am greatly indebted to his
counsels. His reading is extensive. What faults he has lie on the
surface. He is sometimes bluff to rudeness. But all such faults of
manner (and they are his only ones) are but trifling inequalities
in a nature solid and valuable as a block of gold."
This was written with full experience, as the names of Tennyson and
Browning will remind us, for Bulwer-Lytton was slow to admit the value
of these younger talents. His relations with Tennyson have always been
known to be unfortunate; as they are revealed in Lord Lytton's biography
they approach the incredible. He met Browning at Covent Garden Theatre
during the Macready "revival" of the poetic stage, but it was not until
after the publication of _Men and Women_ that he became conscious of
Browning's claim, which he then very grudgingly admitted. He was
grateful to Browning for his kindness to Robert Lytton in Italy, but he
never understood his genius or his character.
What, however, we read with no less pleasure than surprise are the
evidences of Bulwer-Lytton's interest in certain authors of a later
generation, of whom the general public has never suspected him to have
been aware. Something almost like friendship sprang up as lately as 1867
between him and a man whom nobody would suppose him to admire, Matthew
Arnold. It sometimes happens that a sensitive and petulant artist finds
it more easy to acknowledge the merits of his successors than to endure
those of his immediate contemporaries. The _Essays in Criticism_ and
_The Study of Celtic Literature_ called forth from the author of _My
Novel_ and _The Caxtons_ such eulogy as had never been spared for the
writings of Thackeray or Carlyle. Matthew Arnold appeared to
Bulwer-Lytton to have "brought together all that is most modern in
sentiment, with all that is most scholastic in thought and language."
Arnold was a guest at Knebworth, and brought the Duke of Genoa with him.
He liked Bulwer-Lytton, and their relations became very cordial and
lasted for some years; Arnold has given an amusing, but very
sympathetic, account of the dignified hospitalities of Knebworth.
No revelation in Lord Lytton's volumes is, however, more pleasing or
more unexpected than his grandfather's correspondence with Swinburne. It
is thought that he heard of him through Monckton Milnes; at all events,
he was an early reader of _Atalanta in Calydon_. When, in 1866, all the
furies of the Press fell shrieking on _Poems and Ballads_, Bulwer-Lytton
took a very generous step. He wrote to Swinburne, expressing his
sympathy and begging him to be calm. The young poet was extremely
touched, and took occasion to beg the elder writer for his advice, the
publisher having, without consulting him, withdrawn his volume from
sale. Bulwer-Lytton's reply was a most cordial invitation to stay with
him at Knebworth and talk the matter over. Swinburne gratefully
accepted, and John Forster was asked to meet him. It was Bulwer-Lytton,
it appears, who found another publisher for the outraged volume, and
helped Swinburne out of the scrape. He was always kindness itself if an
appeal was made to his protection, and to his sense of justice. However,
pleasant as the visit to Knebworth was, there is no evidence that it was
repeated. Bulwer-Lytton considered Swinburne's opinions preposterous,
and indeed if he told Swinburne, as in 1869 he told his son Robert, that
Victor Hugo was "but an epileptic dwarf in a state of galvanism," there
must have been wigs on the green at Knebworth.
The student of the biography, if he is already familiar with the more
characteristic works of Bulwer-Lytton, will find himself for the first
time provided with a key to much that has puzzled him in the nature of
that author. The story itself, apart from the tragic matrimonial trouble
which runs through it like a blood-red cord, is of unusual interest. It
is a story of strife, without repose, without enjoyment, but with a good
deal of splendour and satisfaction. Almost to the end Bulwer-Lytton was
engaged in struggle. As an ambitious social being he was fighting the
world; as an author he was battling with his critics; as a statesman he
was always in the wild storm of party politics. As a private individual
he was all the time keeping his head up against the tide of social
scandal which attacked him when he least expected it, and often
threatened to drown him altogether. This turmoil contrasts with the calm
of the evening years, after the peerage had been won, the ambition
satisfied, the literary reputation secured.
Few writers have encountered, in their own time and after their death,
so much adverse criticism, and yet have partly survived it. It is hardly
realised, even perhaps by Lord Lytton, how unwilling the reviewers were
to give credit to his grandfather. He never found favour in their eyes,
and it was a matter of constant resentment with him that they did him,
as he thought, injustice. The evidence of his wounded feelings is
constant in his letters. The Quarterly Review never mentioned him
without contempt until 1865, when the publication of his works, in
forty-three volumes, forced it to consider this indefatigable and
popular writer with a measure of respect. Sir Walter Scott, with his
universal geniality, read _Pelham_ in 1828 and "found it very
interesting: the light is easy and gentlemanlike, the dark very grand
and sombrous." He asked who was the author, and he tried to interest his
son-in-law in the novel. But Lockhart was implacable: "_Pelham_," he
replied, "is writ by a Mr. Bulwer, a Norfolk squire, and horrid puppy. I
have not read the book, from disliking the author." Lockhart, however,
did read _Devereux_, and three years afterwards, when reviewing some
other novel, he said of the historical characters in that romance: "It
seems hard to disquiet so many bright spirits for the sole purpose of
showing that they _could_ be dull." That was the attitude of the higher
criticism to Bulwer-Lytton from, let us say, 1830 to 1860; he was "a
horrid puppy" and he was also "dull."
But this was far from being the opinion of the reading public. We have
seen that he never failed, and sometimes he soared into the very
empyrean of popularity. In 1834, when he published _The Last Days of
Pompeii_, again in 1837 when he published _Ernest Maltravers_, the
ecstasy of his adorers discovered their favourite in a moment under the
mask of anonymity which he chose to assume. This was just before the
outburst of the great school of Victorian novelists; Bulwer had as yet
practically no one but Disraeli to compete with. These two, the author
of _Pelham_ and the author of _Vivian Grey_, raced neck and neck at the
head of the vast horde of "fashionable" novel-writers; now all but them
forgotten. In Bulwer-Lytton's romances the reader moved among exalted
personages, alternately flippant and sinister; a "mournful enthusiasm"
was claimed for the writer by the readers of his day. It was the latest
and most powerful development of that Byronic spirit which had been so
shortlived in verse, but which was to survive in prose until
Bulwer-Lytton adopted his _Caxtons_ manner in the middle of the century.
As always in Byronic periods, the portrait of the author himself was
searched for among his most fatal conceptions. To the young library
subscriber the stoical, solitary figure of Mordaunt, in _The Disowned_,
was exactly what was wanted as a representation of the mysterious
novelist himself. Pelham was the apotheosis of the man of fashion, and
it is amusing to read how, when the Bulwer-Lyttons travelled, they were
gazed at in reverence as the Pelham and the Pelhamess.
It would be difficult to improve upon the language used so early as 1832
by one of the very few critics who attempted to do justice to
Bulwer-Lytton's merits. The _Edinburgh Review_ found in him "a style
vigorous and pliable, sometimes strangely incorrect, but often rising
into a touching eloquence." Ten years later such was the private opinion
of D.G. Rossetti, who was "inspired by reading _Rienzi_ and _Ernest
Maltravers_, which is indeed a splendid work." Now that we look back at
Bulwer-Lytton's prodigious compositions, we are able to perceive more
justly than did the critics of his own day what his merits were. For one
thing, he was extraordinarily versatile. If we examine his books, we
must be astonished at their variety. He painted the social life of his
own day, he dived into spectral romance, he revived the beautiful
ceremonies of antiquity, he evoked the great shades of English and of
Continental history, he made realistic and humorous studies of
middle-class life, he engaged in vehement controversy on topics of the
hour, he prophesied of the order of the future, he wrote comedies and
tragedies, epics and epistles, satires and lyrics. His canvasses were
myriad and he crowded every one of them with figures. At his most
Byronic moment he flung his dark cloak aside, and danced in motley
through _Paul Clifford_, with its outrageous caricature of George IV.
and his Ministers as a gang of Hounslow highwaymen. Perhaps his best
claim to regard is the insatiability of his human curiosity, evinced in
the almost infinite variety of his compositions.
The singular being who wrote so large a library of works and whose
actual features have so carefully been concealed from the public, will
be known at last. The piety of his grandson has presented him to us with
no reservations and no false lights. Here he stands, this half-fabulous
being, not sheathed in sham armour and padding the stage in buskins, but
a real personality at length, "with all his weaknesses and faults, his
prejudices, affectations, vanities, susceptibilities, and
eccentricities, and also with all his great qualities of industry,
courage, kindness of heart; sound judgment, patience, and perseverance."
Lord Lytton has carried through to the close a biographical enterprise
of unusual difficulty, and he deserves the thanks of all students of
English literature.
Although I possess in no degree the advantage which so many of the
members of your society enjoy in being personally connected with the
scenes and even, perhaps, with the characters associated with the Brontë
family, I cannot begin my little address to you to-day without some
invocation of the genius of the place. We meet at Dewsbury because the
immortal sisters were identified with Dewsbury. Is it then not
imperative that for whatever picture of them I may endeavour to present
before you this afternoon, Dewsbury should form the background?
Unfortunately, however, although in the hands of a skilful painter the
figures of the ladies may glow forth, I fear that in the matter of
taking Dewsbury as the background some vagueness and some darkness are
inevitable. In the biographies of Mrs. Gaskell and of Mr. Clement
Shorter, as well as in the proceedings of your society, I have searched
for evidences of the place Dewsbury took in the lives of the Brontës.
What I find--I expect you to tell me that it is not exhaustive--is this.
Their father, the Rev. Patrick Brontë, was curate here from 1809 to
school from Roe Head to Heald's House at the top of Dewsbury Moor. In
this school, where Charlotte had been a pupil since 1831, she was now a
governess, and a governess she remained until early in 1838. In April of
that year Miss Wooler was taken ill and Charlotte was for a little while
in charge. Then there was an explosion of temper, of some kind, and
Charlotte went back to Haworth.
That, then, in the main, is the limit of what the scrupulous Muse of
history vouchsafes to tell us about Charlotte Brontë's relation to
Dewsbury. But it also supplies us with one or two phrases which I cannot
bring myself to spare you. In January 1838, Charlotte reviews her
experience at Dewsbury Moor; "I feel," she says, "in nothing better,
nothing humbler nor purer." Again, in 1841, after there had passed time
enough to mellow her exacerbations, she continues to express herself
with vigour. Miss Wooler is making overtures to Charlotte and Emily to
take over the school at Heald's House; perhaps a place might be found
for Anne as well. Miss Wooler, one of the kindest of women, is most
thoughtful, most conciliatory. Charlotte will have none of the idea; she
puts it roughly from her. Of Dewsbury she has nothing to say but that
"it is a poisoned place for me." This is all we know of Charlotte's
relation to Dewsbury, yet nothing, you will tell me, in Froude's phrase,
to what the angels know. Well, I must be frank with you and say that I
am afraid the angels have been inclined to record exceedingly little of
Charlotte Brontë's residence in your inoffensive neighbourhood. I have
to paint a background to my picture, and I find none but the gloomiest
colours. They have to be what the art-critics of the eighteenth century
called "sub-fusc." But it is not the fault of Dewsbury, it is the fault,
or the misfortune, of our remarkable little genius. She was here, in
this wholesome and hospitable vicinity, for several months, during which
time "she felt in nothing better, neither humbler nor purer," and
looking back upon it, she had to admit that it was "a poisoned place"
to her.
I cannot help fancying that you will agree with me, that on such an
occasion as the present, and especially when dealing with a group of
writers about whom so much as has been said as about the Brontës, it is
wise not to cover too wide a ground, but to take, and keep to, one
aspect of the subject. Our little excursion into the history seems to
have given us, under the heading "Dewsbury," a rather grim text, from
which, nevertheless, we may perhaps extract some final consolation. Let
me say at the outset that for the grimness, for the harshness, Dewsbury
is not at all to blame. I fancy that if, in the years from 1836 to 1838,
the Brontë girls had been visitors to Kubla Khan, and had been fed on
honey by his myrmidons at Xanadu, that pleasure-dome would yet have been
"poisoned" to them. It was not poverty, and cold, and the disagreeable
position of a governess, it was not the rough landscape of your moors,
nor its lack of southern amenity which made Charlotte wretched here. It
was not in good Miss Wooler, nor in the pupils, nor in the visitors at
Heald's House that the mischief lay, it was in the closed and patient
crater of Charlotte's own bosom. And I am almost persuaded that, if you
had lived in Dewsbury sixty-five years ago, you would have heard on very
quiet days a faint subterranean sound which you would never have been
able to guess was really the passion, furiously panting, shut up in the
heart of a small, pale governess in Heald's House schoolroom.
If you accuse me of fatalism, I am helpless in your hands, for I confess
I do not see how it could be otherwise, and do scarcely wish that it
could have been. Let us not be too sentimental in this matter. Figures
in literature are notable and valuable to us for what they give us. The
more personal and intense and definite that is, the greater the gift,
the more strenuous the toil and the more severe the initiation which
lead to its expression. The Brontës had a certain thing to learn to
give; what that was we shall presently try to note. But whatever we find
it to be, we start with allowing that it was extremely and boldly
original. It was not to be mastered by lying upon padded sofas and
toying with a little Berlin wool-work. It involved pain, resistance, a
stern revision of things hitherto taken for granted. The secrets which
they designed to wring from nature and from life were not likely to be
revealed to the self-indulgent and the dilettante. The sisters had a
message from the sphere of indignation and revolt. In order that they
should learn it as well as teach it, it was necessary that they should
arrive on the scene at an evil hour for their own happiness. _Jane Eyre_
and _Shirley_ and _Villette_ could not have been written unless, for
long years, the world had been "a poisoned place" for Charlotte Brontë.
It has been excellently said by Mrs. Humphry Ward that in many respects,
and to the very last, the Brontës challenge no less than they attract
us. This is an aspect which, in the midst of rapturous modern
heroine-worship, we are apt to forget. Thackeray, who respected the
genius of the family, and was immensely kind to the author of _Jane
Eyre_, never really felt comfortable in her company. We know how he
stole out of his own front-door, and slipped away into the night to
escape her. "A very austere little person," he called her, and we may
put what emphasis on the austerity we will. I feel sure that any
maladroit "white-washing of Charlotte" will tend, sooner or later,
good-natured though it may be, in a failure to comprehend what she
really was, in what her merit consisted, what the element in her was
that, for instance, calls us here together nearly half a century after
she completed her work and passed away. Young persons of genius very
commonly write depressing books; since, the more vivid an unripe
creature's impression of life is, the more acute is its distress. It is
only extremely stupid Sunday-school children who shout in chorus, "We
are so happy, happy, happy!" Genius thrown naked, with exposed nerves,
on a hard indifferent world, is never "happy" at first. Earth is a
"poisoned place" to it, until it has won its way and woven its garments
and discovered its food.
But in the case of Charlotte Brontë, unhappiness was more than juvenile
fretfulness. All her career was a revolt against conventionality,
against isolation, against irresistible natural forces, such as climate
and ill-health and physical insignificance. Would this insubmissive
spirit have passed out of her writings, as it passed, for instance, out
of those of George Sand? I am not sure, for we see it as strongly,
though more gracefully and skilfully expressed, in _Villette_ as in the
early letters which her biographers have printed. Her hatred of what was
commonplace and narrow and obvious flung her against a wall of
prejudice, which she could not break down. She could only point to it by
her exhausting efforts; she could only invite the generation which
succeeded her to bring their pickaxes to bear upon it. Hence, to the
very last, she seems, more than any other figure in our literature, to
be forever ruffled in temper, for ever angry and wounded and indignant,
rejecting consolation, crouched like a sick animal in the cavern of her
own quenchless pride. This is not an amiable attitude, nor is it
historically true that this was Charlotte Brontë's constant aspect. But
I will venture to say that her amiabilities, her yielding moods, are
really the unessential parts of her disposition, and that a certain
admirable ferocity is the notable feature of her intellectual character.
Her great heart was always bleeding. Here at Dewsbury, in the years we
are contemplating, the hemorrhage was of the most doleful kind, for it
was concealed, suppressed, it was an inward flow. When once she became
an author the pain of her soul was relieved. She said, in 1850, looking
back on the publication of the hapless first volume of poems, "The mere
effort to succeed gave a wonderful zest to existence." Then, a little
later, when no one had paid the slightest attention to the slender trio
of maiden voices, "Something like the chill of despair began to invade
their hearts." With a less powerful inspiration, they must have ceased
to make the effort; they must have succumbed in a melancholy oblivion.
But they were saved by the instinct of a mission. It was not their
private grief which primarily stirred them. What urged them on was the
dim consciousness that they gave voice to a dumb sense of the suffering
of all the world. They had to go on working; they had to pursue their
course, though it might seem sinister or fatal; their business was to
move mankind, not to indulge or please it. They "must be honest; they
must not varnish, soften, or conceal."
What Charlotte Brontë was learning to do in her grim and, let us admit
it, her unlovely probation on Dewsbury Moor, was to introduce a fresh
aspect of the relations of literature to life. Every great writer has a
new note; hers was--defiance. All the aspects in which life presented
itself to her were distressing, not so much in themselves as in herself.
She rebelled against the outrages of poverty, and she drank to its dregs
the cup of straitened circumstances. She was proud, as proud as Lucifer,
and she was forced into positions which suppleness and cheerfulness
might have made tolerable, if not agreeable. She wrung from these
positions their last drop of bitterness. A very remarkable instance of
this may be found in her relation to the Sidgwick family, who, by
universal report, were generous, genial, and unassuming. To Charlotte
Brontë these kindly, if somewhat commonplace folk, grew to seem what a
Turkish pasha seems to the inhabitants of a Macedonian village. It was
not merely the surroundings of her life--it was life itself, in its
general mundane arrangements, which was intolerable to her. She fretted
in it, she beat her wings against its bars, and she would have done the
same if those bars had been of gold, and if the fruits of paradise had
been pushed to her between them. This, I think, is why the expression of
her anger seems too often disproportionate, and why her irony is so apt
to be preposterous. She was born to resist being caged in any form. Her
defiance was universal, and often it was almost indiscriminate.
Do not let us presume to blame this insubmission. Still less let us
commit the folly of minimising it. A good cheerful little Charlotte
Brontë, who thought the best of everybody, who gaily took her place
without a grudging sigh, whose first aim was to make those about her
happy and to minister to their illusions, would have been a much more
welcome inmate of Miss Wooler's household than the cantankerous
governess whom nobody could please, whose susceptibilities were always
on edge, whose lonely arrogance made her feared by all but one or two
who timidly persisted in loving her. But such a paragon of the obvious
virtues would have passed as the birds pass and as the flowers. She
would have left no mark behind. She would never have enriched the
literature of England by one of its master-evidences of the force of
human will. She would never have stirred hundreds of thousands of
consciences to a wholesome questioning of fate and their own souls.
Let us endeavour to pursue the inquiry a few steps further. It is
impossible to separate the ethical conditions of an author's mind from
the work that he produces. The flower requires the soil; it betrays in
its colour and its perfume the environment of its root. The moral
constitution of the writer is reflected in the influence of the written
page. This is the incessant contention; on one hand the independence of
art asserts itself; on the other, it is impossible to escape from the
implicit influence of conduct upon art. There have been few writers of
any age in whom this battle raged more fiercely than it did in Charlotte
Brontë. Her books, and those of her sisters, seem anodyne enough to-day;
to readers of a sensitive species they seemed, when they were published,
as dangerous as _Werther_ had been, as seductive as the _Nouvelle
Heloïse_. The reason of this was, in the main, the spirit of revolt
which inspired them. There was something harsh and glaring in their
landscape; there was that touch of Salvator Rosa which one of their
earliest critics observed in them. But more essential was the
stubbornness, the unflinching determination to revise all accepted
formulas of conduct, to do this or that, not because it was usual to do
it, but because it was rational, and in harmony with human nature.
Into an age which had become almost exclusively utilitarian, and in
which the exercise of the imagination, in its real forms, was sedulously
discountenanced, Charlotte Brontë introduced passion in the sphere of
prose fiction, as Byron had introduced it in the sphere of verse thirty
years earlier. It was an inestimable gift; it had to come to us, from
Charlotte Brontë or another, to save our literature from a decline into
triviality and pretension. But she suffered, as Byron had suffered, in
the direct ratio of her originality. If a writer employs passion in an
age which has ceased to recognise it as one of the necessities of
literary vitality he is safe to be accused of perverting his readers.
Balzac says, "When nothing else can be charged against an author, the
reproach of immorality is thrown at his head." When we study the record
of the grim life of the sisters at Haworth, like that of three young
soldiers round a camp-fire with the unseen enemy prowling in the
darkness just out of their sight--when we think of the strenuous vigil,
the intractable and indomitable persistence, the splendour of the
artistic result--we may console ourselves in our anger at the insults
they endured, by reflecting how little they cared. And their noble
indifference to opinion further endears them to us. We may repeat of
them all what Charlotte in a letter once said of Emily, "A certain
harshness in her powerful and peculiar character only makes me cling to
her more."
This insubmissiveness, which was the unconscious armour given to protect
her against the inevitable attacks of fortune, while, on the other hand,
it was the very sign-manual of Charlotte's genius, was, on the other, a
drawback from which she did not live long enough to emancipate her
nature. It is responsible for her lack of interest in what is delicate
and complex; it excused to herself a narrowness of vision which we are
sometimes tempted to find quite distressing. It is probably the cause of
a fault that never quits her for long, a tendency to make her characters
express themselves with a lyrical extravagance which sometimes comes
close to the confines of rodomontade. Charlotte Brontë never arrives at
that mastery of her material which permits the writer to stand apart
from his work, and sway the reader with successive tides of emotion
while remaining perfectly calm himself. Nor is she one of those whose
visible emotion is nevertheless fugitive, like an odour, and evaporates,
leaving behind it works of art which betray no personal agitation. On
the contrary, her revolt, her passion, all the violence of her
sensibility, are present on her written page, and we cannot read it with
serenity or with a merely captious curiosity, because her own eager
spirit, immortal in its active force, seems to throb beside it.
The aspect of Charlotte Brontë which I have tried to indicate to you
to-day, and which I have sketched thus hastily and slightly against the
background of her almost voiceless residence in Dewsbury, is far from
being a complete or unique one. I offer it to you only as a single facet
of her wonderful temperament, of the rich spectacle of her talent. I
have ventured to propose it, because, in the multiplication of honours
and attentions, the tendency to deify the human, to remove those
phenomena of irregularity which are the evidence of mortal strength,
grows irresistible, and we find ourselves, unconsciously, substituting a
waxen bust, with azure eyes and golden hair, for the homely features
which (if we could but admit it) so infinitely better match the honest
stories. Let us not busy ourselves to make excuse for our austere little
genius of the moors. Let us be content to take her exactly as she was,
with her rebellion and her narrowness, her angers and her urgencies,
perceiving that she had to be this sorrowful offspring of a poisoned
world in order to clear the wells of feeling for others, and to win from
emancipated generations of free souls the gratitude which is due to a
precursor.
It is not easy for a man whose sovereign ambition is seen to be leading
him with great success in a particular direction to obtain due credit
for what he accomplishes with less manifest success in another. There is
no doubt that Disraeli as an author has, at all events until very
lately, suffered from the splendour of his fame as a politician. But he
was an author long before he became a statesman, and it certainly is a
little curious that even in his youth, although he was always
commercially successful with his books, they were never, as we say,
"taken seriously" by the critics. His earliest novels were largely
bought, and produced a wide sensation, but they were barely accepted as
contributions to literature. If we look back to the current criticism of
those times, we find such a book as _Dacre_, a romance by the Countess
of Morley, which is now absolutely forgotten, treated with a dignity and
a consideration never accorded to _The Young Duke_ or to _Henrietta
Temple_. Even Disraeli's satiric squibs, in the manner of Lucian and
Swift, which seem to us among the most durable ornaments of light
literature in the days of William IV., were read and were laughed at,
but were not critically appraised.
So, too, at the middle period of Disraeli's literary life, such books as
_Coningsby_ and _Tancred_ were looked upon as amusing commentaries on
the progress of a strenuous politician, not by any means, or by any
responsible person, as possible minor classics of our language. And at
his third period, the ruling criticism of the hour was aghast at faults
which now entertain us, and was blind to sterling merits which we are
now ready to acknowledge. Shortly after his death, perhaps his most
brilliant apologist was fain to admit that if Disraeli had been
undistinguished as a speaker, his novels would have been "as the flowers
of the field, charming for the day which was passing over them, and then
forgotten." It is only since the beginning of the present century that a
conviction has been gaining ground that some of these books were in
themselves durable, not because they were the work of a man who became
Prime Minister of England and made his sovereign Empress of India, but
as much or as little as if they had been composed by a recluse in a
hermitage. This impression has now become so general with enlightened
critics that the danger seems to be that we should underrate certain
excesses of rhetoric and the Corinthian mode the errors of which used to
be over-emphasised, but should not, in a comparative survey of Victorian
literature, be neglected as serious drawbacks to our perfect enjoyment
of the high-spirited, eloquent, and ardent writings of Benjamin
Disraeli. It is in this spirit of moderation that I now attempt a rapid
sketch of his value as an English author.
There is, perhaps, no second example of a writer whose work is divided,
as is that of Disraeli, into three totally distinct periods. Other
authors, as for example, the poet Crabbe, and in a less marked degree
Rogers, have abandoned the practice of writing for a considerable number
of years, and then have resumed it. But the case of Disraeli seems to be
unique as that of a man who pursued the writing, of books with great
ardour during three brief and independent spaces of time. We have his
first and pre-Parliamentarian period, which began with _Vivian Grey_
(1826) and closed with _Venetia_ (1837). We have a second epoch, opening
with _Coningsby_ (1844) and ending with _Tancred_ (1847), during which
time he was working out his political destiny; and we have the novels
which he wrote after he had won the highest distinction in the State.
Certain general characteristics are met with in all these three classes,
but they have also differences which require to be noted and accounted
for. It will, therefore, be convenient to treat them successively.
As oblivion scatters its poppy over the prose fiction of the reigns of
George IV. and William IV., it becomes in creasingly dangerous that
criticism should take the early "fashionable" novels of Disraeli as
solitary representations of literary satire or observation. It is true
that to readers of to-day this class of romance is exclusively
suggestive of _Vivian Grey_ and its fellows, with perhaps the _Pelham_
of Bulwer. But this was not the impression of the original readers of
these novels, who were amused by them, but found nothing revolutionary
in their treatment of society. In the course of _The Young Duke_,
written in 1829, Disraeli suggests an amiable rivalry with the romances
"written by my friends Mr. Ward and Mr. Bulwer." The latter name had
only just risen above the horizon, but that of Plumer Ward, forgotten as
it now is, was one to conjure by. Ward was the author of _Tremaine_
(1825) and _De Vere_ (1827), two novels of the life of a modern English
gentleman, which seems to a reader to-day to be insipid and dull enough.
But they contained "portraits" of public persons, they undertook to hold
the mirror up to the political and fashionable world of London, and they
lashed that fastidiousness which was considered to be the foible of the
age.
The books of Plumer Ward, who was an accomplished personage in advancing
years, were treated with marked distinction in the press, and were
welcomed by critics who deigned to take little notice of even such books
as _Granby_ and _Dacre_. But the stories of the youthful Disraeli
belonged to a class held in still less esteem than those just mentioned.
They had to hold their own as best they might in rivalry with a huge
flight of novels of fashionable life, all of them curiously similar in
general treatment. Above these the romances of Plumer Ward rose in a
sort of recognised dignity, as two peaks around which were crowded
innumerable hillocks. It is necessary to recall readers of to-day, who
think of _Vivian Grey_ as a work of amazing novelty, to the fact that
the _genre_ it represents to us was one which had been lifted into high
credit the year before by the consecrated success of _Tremaine_, and was
at that moment cultivated by a multitude of minor novelists.
There was, however, a distinction, and it lay in the greater fund of
animal spirits which Disraeli brought to his business. _Vivian Grey_ was
absurd, but it was fresh and popular, and it pleased at once. As the
opening work of a literary career, it promised well; the impertinent
young gentleman dashed off to Parnassus at a gallop. It was a bold bid
for personal distinction, which the author easily perceived already to
be "the only passport to the society of the great in England." _Vivian
Grey_ is little more than a spirited and daring boy's book; Disraeli
himself called it "a hot and hurried sketch." It was a sketch of what he
had never seen, yet of what he had begun to foresee with amazing
lucidity. It is a sort of social fairy-tale, where every one has
exquisite beauty, limitless wealth, and exalted rank, where the
impossible and the hyperbolic are the only homely virtues. There has
always been a tendency to exalt _Vivian Grey_ at the expense of _The
Young Duke_ (1831), Disraeli's next leading permanence; and, indeed, the
former has had its admirers who have preferred it to all the others in
this period. The difference is, however, not so marked as might be
supposed. In _The Young Duke_ the manner is not so burlesque, but there
is the same roughness of execution, combined with the same rush and
fire. In either book, what we feel to-day to be the great objection to
our enjoyment is the lack of verisimilitude. Who can believe in the
existence of persons whose titles are the Earl of Fitz-Pompey and Baron
Deprivyseal, or whose names are Lady Aphrodite and Sir Carte Blanche?
The descriptions are "high-falutin" beyond all endurance, and there is
particularly noticeable a kind of stylistic foppery, which is always
hovering between sublimity and a giggle.
But here is an example, from _Vivian Grey_, of Disraeli's earliest
manner:--
"After a moment had passed, he was pouring forth in a rapid voice,
and incoherent manner, such words as men speak only once. He spoke
of his early follies, his misfortunes, his misery; of his matured
views, his settled principles, his plans, his prospects, his hopes,
his happiness, his bliss; and when he had ceased, he listened, in
his turn, to some small still words, which made him the happiest of
human beings. He bent down, he kissed the soft silken cheek which
now he could call his own. Her hand was in his; her head sank upon
his breast. Suddenly she clung to him with a strong clasp. 'Violet!
my own, my dearest; you are overcome. I have been rash, I have been
imprudent. Speak, speak, my beloved! say, you are not ill!'
"She spoke not, but clung to him with a fearful strength, her head
still upon his breast, her full eyes closed. Alarmed, he raised her
off the ground, and bore her to the river-side. Water might revive
her. But when he tried to lay her a moment on the bank, she clung
to him gasping, as a sinking person clings to a stout swimmer. He
leant over her; he did not attempt to disengage her arms; and, by
degrees, by very slow degrees, her grasp loosened. At last her arms
gave way and fell by her side, and her eyes partly opened.
"'Thank God! Violet, my own, my beloved, say you are better!'
"She answered not, evidently she did not know him, evidently she
did not see him. A film was on her sight, and her eye was glassy.
He rushed to the water-side, and in a moment he had sprinkled her
temples, now covered with a cold dew. Her pulse beat not, her
circulation seemed suspended. He rubbed the palms of her hands, he
covered her delicate feet with his coat, and then rushing up the
bank into the road, he shouted with frantic cries on all sides. No
one came, no one was near. Again, with a cry of fearful anguish, he
shouted as if an hyena were feeding on his vitals. No sound; no
answer. The nearest cottage was above a mile off. He dared not
leave her. Again he rushed down to the water-side. Her eyes were
still open, still fixed. Her mouth also was no longer closed. Her
hand was stiff, her heart had ceased to beat. He tried with the
warmth of his own body to revive her. He shouted, he wept, he
prayed. All, all in vain. Again he was in the road, again shouting
like an insane being. There was a sound. Hark! It was but the
screech of an owl!
"Once more at the river-side, once more bending over her with
starting eyes, once more the attentive ear listening for the
soundless breath. No sound! not even a sigh! Oh! what would he have
given for her shriek of anguish! No change had occurred in her
position, but the lower part of her face had fallen; and there was
a general appearance which struck him with awe. Her body was quite
cold, her limbs stiffened. He gazed, and gazed, and gazed. He bent
over her with stupor rather than grief stamped on his features. It
was very slowly that the dark thought came over his mind, very
slowly that the horrible truth seized upon his soul. He gave a loud
shriek, and fell on the lifeless body of VIOLET FANE!"
A line in Disraeli's unfortunate tragedy of _Alarcos_ pathetically
admits: "Ay! ever pert is youth that baffles age!" The youth of Disraeli
was "pert" beyond all record, and those who cannot endure to be teased
should not turn to his early romances, or, indeed, to any of his
writings. _Henrietta Temple_ is the boldest attempt he ever made to tell
a great consecutive story of passion, and no doubt there have been those
who have palpitated over the love-at-first-sight of Ferdinand Armine and
Henrietta Temple. But Disraeli's serious vein is here over-luscious; the
love-passages are too emphatic and too sweet. An early critic spoke of
this _dulcia vitia_ of style which we meet with even in _Contarini
Fleming_ as the sin by which the young author was most easily beset. His
attempts at serious sentiment and pompous reflection are too often
deplorable, because inanimate and stilted. When he warns a heroine
against an error of judgment by shouting, "'Tis the madness of the fawn
who gazes with adoration on the lurid glare of the anaconda's eye," or
murmurs, "Farewell, my lovely bird; I'll soon return to pillow in thy
nest," we need all the stimulus of his irony and his velocity to carry
us over such marshlands of cold style.
Of these imperfections, fewer are to be found in _Venetia_ and fewest in
_Contarini Fleming_. This beautiful romance is by far the best of
Disraeli's early books, and that in which his methods at this period can
be most favourably studied. A curious shadow of Disraeli himself is
thrown over it all; it cannot be styled in any direct sense an
autobiography, and yet the mental and moral experiences of the author
animate every chapter of it. This novel is written with far more ease
and grace than any previous book of the author's, and Contarini gives a
reason which explains the improvement in his creator's manner when he
remarks: "I wrote with greater facility than before, because my
experience of life was so much increased that I had no difficulty in
making my characters think and act." _Contarini Fleming_ belongs to
had already seen a vast deal of man and of the world of Europe.
We are not to believe the preposterous account that Contarini-Disraeli
gives of his methods of composition:--
"My thoughts, my passion, the rush of my invention, were too quick
for my pen. Page followed page; as a sheet was finished I threw it
on the floor; I was amazed at the rapid and prolific production,
yet I could not stop to wonder. In half a dozen hours I sank back
exhausted, with an aching frame. I rang the bell, ordered some
refreshment, and walked about the room. The wine invigorated me and
warmed up my sinking fancy, which, however, required little fuel. I
set to it again, and it was midnight before I retired to bed."
At this rate we may easily compute that the longest of his novels would
be finished in a week. _Contarini Fleming_ seems to have occupied him
the greater part of a year. He liked the public to think of him,
exquisitely habited, his long essenced hair falling about his eyes,
flinging forth a torrent of musky and mellifluous improvisation; as a
matter of fact he was a very hard worker, laborious in the arts of
composition.
It is to be noted that the whole tone of _Contarini Fleming_ is
intensely literary. The appeal to the intellectual, to the fastidious
reader is incessant. This is an attitude always rare in English fiction,
but at that epoch almost unknown, and its presence in the writings of
Disraeli gives them a cachet. Under all the preposterous conversation,
all the unruly turmoil of description, there runs a strong thread of
entirely sober, political, and philosophical ambition. Disraeli striving
with all his might to be a great poet, of the class of Byron and Goethe,
a poet who is also a great mover and master of men--this is what is
manifest to us throughout _Contarini Fleming_. It is almost pathetically
manifest, because Disraeli--whatever else he grew to be--never became a
poet. And here, too, his wonderful clairvoyance, and his command over
the vagaries of his own imagination, come into play, for he never
persuades himself, with all his dithyrambics, that Contarini is quite a
poet.
A new influence is felt upon his style, and it is a highly beneficial
one. Up to this date, Disraeli had kept Byron before him, and in his
serious moments he had endeavoured to accomplish in prose what the
mysterious and melancholy poet of the preceding generation had done in
verse. The general effect of this Byronism, in spite of a certain
buoyancy which carried the reader onwards, had been apt to be wearisome,
in consequence of the monotony of effort. The fancy of the author had
been too uniformly grandiose, and in the attempt to brighten it up he
had sometimes passed over into positive failure. The most unyielding
admirers of his early novels can hardly contradict a reader who
complains that he finds the adventures of the bandits at Jonstorna
insupportable and the _naïveté_ of Christiana mawkish. There are pages
in _Alroy_ that read as if they were written for a wager, to see how
much balderdash the public will endure. Disraeli seems to have been
conscious of this weakness, and he tried to relieve the pompous gravity
of his passionate scenes by episodes of irony and satire. From his
earliest days these were apt to be very happy; they were inspired,
especially in the squibs, by Lucian and Swift.
But in _Contarini Fleming_ we detect a new flavour, and it is a very
fortunate one. The bitterness of Swift was never quite in harmony with
the genius of Disraeli, but the irony of Voltaire was. The effect of
reading _Zadig_ and _Candide_ was the completion of the style of
Disraeli; that "strange mixture of brilliant fantasy and poignant truth"
which he rightly perceived to be the essence of the philosophic _contes_
of Voltaire, finished his own intellectual education. Henceforth he does
not allow his seriousness to overweigh his liveliness; if he detects a
tendency to bombast, he relieves it with a brilliant jest. Count de
Moltke and the lampoons offer us a case to our hand; "he was just the
old fool who would make a cream cheese," says Contarini, and the
startled laugh which greets him is exactly of the same order as those
which were wont to reward the statesman's amazing utterances in
Parliament.
In spite of a certain undeniable insipidity, the volumes of _Contarini
Fleming_ cannot but be read with pleasure. The mixture of Byron and
Voltaire is surprising, but it produces some agreeable effects. There is
a dash of Shelley in it, too, for the life on the isle of Paradise with
Alcesté Contarini is plainly borrowed from _Epiphsychidion_. Disraeli
does not even disdain a touch of "Monk" Lewis without his
voluptuousness, and of Mrs. Radcliffe without her horrors, for he is
bent on serving up an olio entirely in the taste of the day. But through
it all he is conspicuously himself, and the dedication to beauty and the
extraordinary intellectual exultation of such a book as _Contarini
Fleming_ are borrowed from no exotic source.
It is impossible to overlook the fascination which Venice exercises
over Disraeli in these early novels. Contarini's great ambition was to
indite "a tale which should embrace Venice and Greece." Byron's _Life
and Letters_ and the completion of Rogers' _Italy_ with Turner's
paradisaical designs had recently awakened to its full the romantic
interest which long had been gathering around "the sun-girt city."
Whenever Disraeli reaches Venice his style improves, and if he mourns
over her decay, his spirits rise when he has to describe her
enchantments by moonlight. He reserves his most delicate effects for
Greece and Venice:--
"A Grecian sunset! The sky is like the neck of a dove! the rocks
and waters are bathed with a violet light. Each moment it changes;
each moment it shifts into more graceful and more gleaming shadows.
And the thin white moon is above all; the thin white moon, followed
by a single star, like a lady by a page."
There are many passages as sumptuous as this in _Venetia_, the romance
about Byron and Shelley, which Disraeli was thought indiscreet in
publishing so soon after Byron's death. In the story the heroine Venetia
is the daughter of Shelley (Marmion Herbert) and the bride of Byron
(Lord Cadurcis). Marmion is a most melodramatic figure, but the
indiscretions are not noticeable nowadays, while the courage with which
the reviled and hated Shelley is described in the preface to Lord
Lyndhurst as one of "the most renowned and refined spirits that have
adorned these our latter days" is highly characteristic of Disraeli. The
reception of Lord Cadurcis in the House of Peers and the subsequent riot
in Palace Yard mark, perhaps, the highest point in direct narrative
power which the novelist had yet reached; but _Venetia_ was not liked,
and Disraeli withdrew from literature into public life.
When Disraeli resumed the art of the novelist, he was no longer talking
of what lay outside his experience when he touched on politics. In 1837
he had entered the House at last, as Member for Maidstone, and although
his enemies roared him down on the first occasion of his rising to
speak, he soon learned how to impose his voice on Parliament. In 1839
his declaration that "the rights of labour are as sacred as the rights
of property" made him famous, and in 1841 he was one of Sir Robert
Peel's Conservative army in the House. Then followed the formation of
the Young England Party, with Disraeli as one of its leaders; these men
broke away from Peel, and held that the Tory Party required stringent
reform from within. It was in 1843 that Henry Thomas Hope, of Deepdene,
urged, at a meeting of the Young Englanders, the expediency of
Disraeli's "treating in a literary form those views and subjects which
were the matter of their frequent conversations." Disraeli instantly
returned to literary composition, and produced in quick succession the
four books which form the second section of his work as an author; these
are _Coningsby_, _Sybil_, _Tancred_, and the _Life of Lord George
Bentinck_.
In this group of books we observe, in the first place, a great advance
in vitality and credibility over the novels of the earlier period.
Disraeli is now describing what he knows, no longer what he hopes in
process of time to know. He writes from within, no longer from without
the world of political action. These three novels and a biography are
curiously like one another in form, and all equally make a claim to be
considered not mere works of entertainment, but serious contributions to
political philosophy. The assumption is borne out by the character of
the books, each of which had a definite aim and purpose. _Coningsby_
was designed to make room for new talent in the Tory Party by an
unflinching attack on the "mediocrities." In _Sybil_ the heartless abuse
of capital and the vices of class distinction are exposed. _Tancred_ is
a vision of better things to follow upon the reforms already indicated.
In _Lord George Bentinck_, under the guise of a record of the struggle
between Protection and Free Trade, we have a manual of personal conduct
as applied to practical politics.
In all these works narrative pure and simple inclines to take a
secondary place. It does so least in _Coningsby_ which, as a story, is
the most attractive book of Disraeli's middle period, and one of the
most brilliant studies of political character ever published. The tale
is interspersed with historical essays, which impede its progress but
add to its weight and value. Where, however, the author throws himself
into his narrative, the advance he has made in power, and particularly
in truth of presentment, is very remarkable. In the early group of his
novels he had felt a great difficulty in transcribing conversations so
as to produce a natural and easy effect. He no longer, in _Coningsby_,
is confronted by this artificiality. His dialogues are now generally
remarkable for their ease and nature. The speeches of Rigby (who
represents John Wilson Croker), of Lord Monmouth (who stands for Lord
Hertford), of the Young Englanders themselves, of the laughable chorus
of Taper and Tadpole, who never "despaired of the Commonwealth," are
often extremely amusing. In _Coningsby_ we have risen out of the
rose-coloured mist of unreality which hung over books like _The Young
Duke_ and _Henrietta Temple_. The agitated gentleman whose peerage hangs
in the balance, and who on hearing that the Duke of Wellington is with
the King breathes out in a sigh of relief "Then there _is_ a
Providence," is a type of the subsidiary figure which Disraeli had now
learned to introduce with infinite lightness of irony.
Disraeli had a passion for early youth, and in almost all his books he
dwells lovingly upon its characteristics. It is particularly in
_Contarini Fleming_ and in _Coningsby_--that is to say, in the best
novels of his first and of his second period--that he lingers over the
picture of schoolboy life with tenderness and sympathy. We have only to
compare them, however, to see how great an advance he had made in ten
years in his power of depicting such scenes. The childish dreams of
Contarini are unchecked romance, and though the friendship with Musæus
is drawn with delicacy and insight, and though that is an extremely
pretty scene where Christiana soothes the pride of Contarini, yet a
manliness and a reality are missing which we find in the wonderful Eton
scenes of _Coningsby_.
Disraeli's comprehension of the feelings of half-grown ambitious boys of
good family was extraordinary, and when we consider that he had never
been to a public school, his picture of the life and conversation at
Eton is remarkable for its fidelity to nature. The relation of the elder
schoolboys to one another--a theme to which he was fond of recurring--is
treated in a very adroit and natural spirit, not without a certain
Dorian beauty. This preoccupation with the sentiments and passions of
schoolboys was rather crudely found fault with at the time. We need have
no difficulty in comprehending the pleasure he felt in watching the
expansion of those youthful minds from whom he hoped for all that was to
make England wise and free. The account of Coningsby's last night at
Eton is one of the most deeply felt pages which Disraeli ever composed,
and here it may be said that the careful avoidance of all humour--an act
of self-denial which a smaller writer would not have been capable of--is
justified by the dignified success of a very dangerous experiment.
The portraiture of living people is performed with the greatest
good-nature. It is difficult to believe that the most sensitive and the
most satirised could really be infuriated, so kindly and genial is the
caricaturing. We are far here from Swift's bludgeon and from Voltaire's
poisoned needle. The regeneration of the social order in England, as
Disraeli dreamed it, involved the removal of some mediocrities, but he
was neither angry nor impatient. The "brilliant personages who had just
scampered up from Melton, thinking it probable that Sir Robert might
want some moral Lords of the Bedchamber," and the Duke, who "might have
acquired considerable information, if he had not in his youth made so
many Latin verses," were true to their principles, and would scarcely
have done more than blush faintly when he poked his fun at them. Of all
the portraits none is more interesting than that of the dark, pale
stranger, Sidonia, as he revealed himself to Coningsby at the inn in the
forest, over the celebrated dish of "still-hissing bacon and eggs that
looked like tufts of primroses." This was a figure which was to recur,
and to become in the public mind almost coincident with that of Disraeli
himself.
When we pass from _Coningsby_ to _Sybil_ we find the purely narrative
interest considerably reduced in the pursuit of a scheme of political
philosophy. This is of all Disraeli's novels the one which most
resembles a pamphlet on a serious topic. For this reason it has never
been a favourite among his works, and his lighter readers have passed it
over with a glance. _Sybil_, however, is best not read at all if it is
not carefully studied. In the course of _Coningsby_, that young hero had
found his way to Manchester, and had discovered in it a new world,
"poignant with new ideas, and suggestive of new trains of thought and
feeling." His superficial observation had revealed many incongruities in
our methods of manipulating wealth, and Disraeli had sketched the
portrait of Mr. Jawster Sharp with a superfluity of sarcastic wit. But
it was not until somewhat later that the condition of the
working-classes in our northern manufacturing districts began to attract
his most serious attention. The late Duke of Rutland, that illustrious
and venerable friend who alone survived in the twentieth century to bear
witness to the sentiments of Young England, told me that he accompanied
Disraeli on the journey which led to the composition of Sybil, and that
he never, in long years of intimacy, saw him so profoundly moved as he
was at the aspect of the miserable dwellings of the hand-loom workers.
All this is reflected on the surface of _Sybil_, and, notwithstanding
curious faults in execution, the book bears the impress of a deep and
true emotion. Oddly enough, the style of Disraeli is never more stilted
than it is in the conversations of the poor in this story. When Gerard,
the weaver, wishes to prevent the police-inspector from arresting his
daughter, he remarks: "Advance and touch this maiden, and I will fell
you and your minions like oxen at their pasture." Well may the serjeant
answer, "You _are_ a queer chap." Criticism goes further and says, "You
are a chap who never walked in wynd or factory of a Yorkshire town."
This want of nature, which did not extend to Disraeli's conversations
among well-to-do folks, was a real misfortune, and gave _Sybil_ no
chance of holding its own in rivalry with such realistic studies of the
depression of trade in Manchester as Mrs. Gaskell was presently to
produce, nor with the ease of dialogue in Dickens' Christmas Stories,
which were just now (in 1845) running their popular course. A happier
simplicity of style, founded on a closer familiarity, would have given
fresh force to his burning indignation, and have helped the cause of
Devils-dust and Dandy Mick. But the accident of stilted speech must not
blind us to the sincere and glowing emotion that inspired the pictures
of human suffering in _Sybil_.
Then followed _Tancred_, which, as it has always been reported,
continued to the last to be the author's favourite among his literary
offspring. Disraeli had little sympathy with either of the great parties
which in that day governed English political life. As time went on, he
became surer than ever of the degeneracy of modern society, and he began
to despair of discovering any cure for it. In _Tancred_ he laid aside in
great measure his mood of satirical extravagance. The whole of this book
is steeped in the colours of poetry--of poetry, that is to say, as the
florid mind of Disraeli conceived it. It opens--as all his books love to
open--with the chronicle of an ardent and innocent boy's career. This is
commonplace, but when Tancred, who is mainly the author's customary type
of young Englishman born in the purple, arrives in the Holy Land, a
flush of pure romance passes over the whole texture of the narrative.
Real life is forgotten, and we move in a fabulous, but intensely
picturesque, world of ecstasy and dream.
The Prerogation of Judaism, as it had been laid down by Sidonia in
_Coningsby_, is emphasised and developed, and is indeed made the central
theme of the story in _Tancred_. This novel is inspired by an outspoken
and enthusiastic respect for the Hebrew race and a perfect belief in its
future. In the presence of the mighty monuments of Jerusalem, Disraeli
forgets that he is a Christian and an ambitious member of the English
Parliament. His only solicitude is to recover his privileges as a Jew,
and to recollect that he stands in the majestic cradle of his race. He
becomes interpenetrated with solemn mysticism; a wind of faith blows in
his hair. He cries, "God never spoke except to an Arab," and we are
therefore not surprised to find an actual Divine message presently
pronounced in Tancred's ears as he stands on the summit of Mount Sinai.
This is, perhaps, the boldest flight of imagination which occurs in the
writings of Disraeli. Tancred endeavours to counteract the purely
Hebraic influences of Palestine by making a journey of homage to
Astarte, a mysterious and beautiful Pagan queen--an "Aryan," as he loves
to put it--who reigns in the mountains of Syria. But even she does not
encourage him to put his trust in the progress of Western Europe.
_Tancred_ is written in Disraeli's best middle style, full, sonorous,
daring, and rarely swelling into bombast. It would even be too uniformly
grave if the fantastic character of Facredeen did not relieve the
solemnity of the discourse with his amusing tirades. Like that of all
Disraeli's novels, the close of this one is dim and unsatisfactory. If
there is anything that the patient reader wants to know it is how the
Duke and Duchess of Bellemont behaved to the Lady of Bethany when they
arrived at Jerusalem and found their son in the kiosk under her
palm-tree. But this is curiosity of a class which Disraeli is not
unwilling to awaken, but which he never cares to satisfy. He places the
problems in a heap before us, and he leaves us to untie the knots. It is
a highly characteristic trait of his mind as a writer that he is for
ever preoccupied with the beginnings of things, and as little as
possible with their endings.
It is not, however, from _Tancred_ but from _Coningsby_, that we take
our example of Disraeli's second manner:--
"Even to catch Lord Monmouth's glance was not an easy affair; he
was much occupied on one side by the great lady, on the other were
several gentlemen who occasionally joined in the conversation. But
something must be done.
"There ran through Coningsby's character, as we have before
mentioned, a vein of simplicity which was not its least charm. It
resulted, no doubt, in a great degree from the earnestness of his
nature. There never was a boy so totally devoid of affectation,
which was remarkable, for he had a brilliant imagination, a quality
that, from its fantasies, and the vague and indefinite desires it
engenders, generally makes those whose characters are not formed,
affected. The Duchess, who was a fine judge of character, and who
greatly regarded Coningsby, often mentioned this trait as one
which, combined with his great abilities and acquirements so
unusual at his age, rendered him very interesting. In the present
instance it happened that, while Coningsby was watching his
grandfather, he observed a gentleman advance, make his bow, say and
receive a few words and retire. This little incident, however, made
a momentary diversion in the immediate circle of Lord Monmouth, and
before they could all resume their former talk and fall into their
previous positions, an impulse sent forth Coningsby, who walked up
to Lord Monmouth, and standing before him, said,
"'How do you do, grandpapa?'
"Lord Monmouth beheld his grandson. His comprehensive and
penetrating glance took in every point with a flash. There stood
before him one of the handsomest youths he had ever seen, with a
mien as graceful as his countenance was captivating; and his whole
air breathing that freshness and ingenuousness which none so much
appreciates as the used man of the world. And this was his child;
the only one of his blood to whom he had been kind. It would be an
exaggeration to say that Lord Monmouth's heart was touched; but his
good-nature effervesced, and his fine taste was deeply gratified.
He perceived in an instant such a relation might be a valuable
adherent; an irresistible candidate for future elections: a
brilliant tool to work out the Dukedom. All these impressions and
ideas, and many more, passed through the quick brain of Lord
Monmouth ere the sound of Coningsby's words had seemed to cease,
and long before the surrounding guests had recovered from the
surprise which they had occasioned them, and which did not
diminish, when Lord Monmouth, advancing, placed his arms round
Coningsby with a dignity of affection that would have become Louis
XIV., and then, in the high manner of the old Court, kissed him on
each cheek.
"'Welcome to your home,' said Lord Monmouth. 'You have grown a
great deal.'
"Then Lord Monmouth led the agitated Coningsby to the great lady,
who was a Princess and an Ambassadress, and then, placing his arm
gracefully in that of his grandson, he led him across the room, and
presented him in due form to some royal blood that was his guest,
in the shape of a Russian Grand Duke. His Imperial Highness
received our hero as graciously as the grandson of Lord Monmouth
might expect; but no greeting can be imagined warmer than the one
he received from the lady with whom the Grand Duke was conversing.
She was a dame whose beauty was mature, but still radiant. Her
figure was superb; her dark hair crowned with a tiara of curious
workmanship. Her rounded arm was covered with costly bracelets, but
not a jewel on her finely-formed bust, and the least possible rouge
on her still oval cheek. Madame Colonna retained her charms."
Nearly a quarter of a century passed, during which Disraeli slowly rose
to the highest honours in the State. Lord Derby died, and the novelist,
already Leader of the House of Commons, found himself called to be Prime
Minister of England. His first administration, however, was brief, and
in the last days of 1868 he resigned in favour of Mr. Gladstone. The
Liberals were in for five years, and Disraeli, in opposition, found a
sort of tableland stretch in front of him after so much arduous
climbing. It was at this moment, shortly after the resignation of the
Tory Minister, that the publisher of a magazine approached him with the
request that he would write a novel to appear in its pages. He was
offered, it is said, a sum of money far in excess of what any one, at
that time, had ever received for "serial rights." Disraeli refused the
offer, but it may have drawn his thoughts back to literature, and in the
course of 1869, after the disestablishment of the Church of Ireland was
completed, he found time to write what is unquestionably the greatest of
his literary works--the superb ironic romance of _Lothair_.
Eminent as he was and eminently successful, Disraeli was far, in 1870,
from having conquered public opinion in England. The reception of his
new novel was noisy, and enjoyed to the full the clamours of
advertisement, but it was not favourable. The critics laughed it to
scorn, and called it a farce and a failure. The _Quarterly Review_, in
the course of a savage diatribe, declared that it was "as dull as
ditch-water and as flat as a flounder," and in a graver mood reproved it
as a mere "bid for the bigoted voices of Exeter Hall." Some of the
criticisms were not wanting in acumen. It was perceived at once that, as
Theodora Campion is the heroine of the book, it was an error in art to
kill her off in the middle of it. Moreover, it is only fair to admit
that if the stormy Parliamentarian life Disraeli had led so long had
given him immense personal advantages, it had also developed some
defects. It had taught him boundless independence and courage, it had
given him a rare experience of men and manners, and it had lifted his
satire far above petty or narrow personal considerations. But it had
encouraged a looseness of utterance, a mixture of the colloquial and the
bombastic, which was unfortunate. In the best parts of _Coningsby_ and
of _Tancred_ he had shown himself a very careless writer of English. But
_Lothair_, even in its corrected form--and the first edition is a
miracle of laxity--is curiously incorrect. It reads as though it were
taken down from the flowing speech of a fine orator, not as though it
were painfully composed in a study; it contains surprising ellipses,
strange freaks of grammar. There was all this, and more, to encourage
the critics, whom Disraeli had gone out of his way to affront in a
violent epigram, to attack _Lothair_ with contempt and resentment.
The critics took irony for timidity; they thought that the sardonic
novelist was the dupe of the splendours which he invented and gloated
over. But if one thing is more evident than another to-day it is that
this gorgeous story of a noble boy, whose guardians, a Presbyterian earl
and a Roman cardinal, quarrelled for his soul and for his acres, is an
immense satire from first to last. In Disraeli's own words, used in
another sense, the keynote of _Lothair_ is "mockery blended with Ionian
splendour." Never had he mocked so dauntlessly, never had his fancy been
more exuberant, and those who criticise the magnificence must realise
that it was intentional. It was thus that Disraeli loved to see life,
and, most of all, the life he laughed at. He had always been gorgeous,
but he let himself go in _Lothair_; all is like the dream of a Lorenzo
dei Medicis or an Aurungzebe. Nothing is done by halves. Muriel Towers
was set on "the largest natural lake that inland England boasts"--some
lake far larger than Windermere and entirely unsuspected by geographers.
This piece of water is studded with "green islands," which is natural.
But the author cannot stay his hand: this largest of the English lakes
is also alive with "golden gondolas," which are rarer objects. In one of
the odd little flashes of self-criticism which illuminate the book
Lothair says of a certain northern garden, with its fanes and its
fountains, its glittering statues and its Babylonian terraces, that
there are "perhaps too many temples."
There are perhaps too many temples in the landscape of _Lothair_, but
they were put in on purpose. The splendour is part of the satire. When
the hero has ordered an architect to make some plans for a building, the
door opens and servants enter bearing "a large and magnificent portfolio
of morocco, made of prelatial purple with broad bands of gold and
alternate ornaments of a cross and a coronet." It is the sort of
portfolio that Belshazzar might have used, but no English master-builder
since time began ever launched forth into such splendour. This is
characteristic of Disraeli and of his book; it pleased him to wrap all
his fancies in jewelled cloth of gold. He chose that the world should
consist of nothing but Tudor palaces in colossal parks, and that time
should be no other than a perpetual Holy Week of golden ceremonial. He
knew his public, and that it adored these follies. He spoke to them in
the language that they loved, but in a tone of the most seraphical
disdain and irony.
What marks the whole of Disraeli's writings more than any other quality
is the buoyant and radiant temperament of their author. In _Lothair_ he
is like an inspired and enfranchised boy, set free from all the trammels
of reality, and yet bringing to the service of his theme the results of
an extraordinary inherited experience. If the picture is not real, we
may take courage to say that it is far better than reality--more rich,
more entertaining, more intoxicating. We have said that it is carelessly
written, but that is part of the author's superb self-confidence, and
when he is fortunately inspired, he obtains here an ease of style, a
mastery which he had never found before. The sureness of his touch is
seen in the epigrams which strew the pages of _Lothair_, and have become
part of our habitual speech--the phrase about eating "a little fruit on
a green bank with music"; that which describes the hansom cab, "'Tis the
gondola of London." This may lead us on to the consideration that
Disraeli is one of those who have felt most vividly and expressed most
gaily the peculiar physical beauty of London. He saw the Park as the
true Londoner sees it--when "the chestnuts are in silver bloom, and the
pink may has flushed the thorns, and banks of sloping turf are radiant
with plots of gorgeous flowers; when the water glitters in the sun, and
the air is fragrant with that spell which only can be found in
metropolitan mignonette." He describes as no one else has ever done with
equal mastery a stately and successful house-party in a great country
mansion. He had developed, when he composed _Lothair_, a fuller sense of
beauty than he had ever possessed before, but it revelled in forms that
were partly artificial and partly fabulous. An example of these forms
may now be welcome:--
"Mr. Giles took an early easy opportunity of apprising Lady
Farringford that she had nearly met Cardinal Grandison at dinner,
and that his Eminence would certainly pay his respects to Mrs.
Putney Giles in the evening. As Lady Farringford was at present a
high ritualist, and had even been talked of as 'going to Rome,'
this intelligence was stunning, and it was observed that her
Ladyship was unusually subdued during the whole of the second
course.
"On the right of Lothair sate the wife of a Vice-Chancellor, a
quiet and pleasing lady, to whom Lothair, with natural good
breeding, paid snatches of happy attention, when he could for a
moment with propriety withdraw himself from the blaze of
Apollonia's coruscating conversation. Then there was a rather
fierce-looking Red Ribbon, medalled as well as be-starred, and the
Red Ribbon's wife, with a blushing daughter, in spite of her
parentage not yet accustomed to stand fire. A partner and his
unusually numerous family had the pleasure also of seeing Lothair
for the first time, and there were no less than four M.P.'s, one of
whom was even in office.
"Apollonia was stating to Lothair, with brilliant perspicuity, the
reasons which quite induced her to believe that the Gulf Stream had
changed its course, and the political and social consequences that
might accrue.
"'The religious sentiment of the Southern races must be wonderfully
affected by a more rigorous climate,' said Apollonia. 'I cannot
doubt,' she continued, 'that a series of severe winters at Rome
might put an end to Romanism.
"'But is there any fear that a reciprocal influence might be
exercised on the Northern nations?' inquired Lothair. 'Would there
be any apprehension of our Protestantism becoming proportionately
relaxed?'
"'Of course not,' said Apollonia. 'Truth cannot be affected by
climate. Truth is truth alike in Palestine and Scandinavia.'
"'I wonder what the Cardinal would think of this,' said Lothair,
'who, you tell me, is coming to you this evening.'
"'Yes, I am most interested to see him, though he is the most
puissant of our foes. Of course he would take refuge in sophistry;
and science, you know, they deny.'
"'Cardinal Grandison is giving some lectures on science,' said the
Vice-Chancellor's lady, quietly.
"'It is remorse,' said Apollonia. 'Their clever men can never
forget that unfortunate affair of Galileo, and think they can
divert the indignation of the nineteenth century by mock zeal about
red sandstone or the origin of species.'
"'And are you afraid of the Gulf Stream?' inquired Lothair of his
calmer neighbour.
"'I think we want more evidence of a change. The Vice-Chancellor
and I went down to a place we have near town on Saturday, where
there is a very nice piece of water; indeed, some people call it a
lake; it was quite frozen, and my boys wanted to skate, but that I
would not permit.'
"'You believe in the Gulf Stream to that extent,' said Lothair; 'no
skating.'
"The Cardinal came early; the ladies had not long left the
dining-room. They were agitated when his name was announced; even
Apollonia's heart beat; but then that might be accounted for by the
inopportune recollection of an occasional correspondence with
Caprera.
"Nothing could exceed the simple suavity with which the Cardinal
appeared, approached, and greeted them. He thanked Apollonia for
her permission to pay his respects to her, which he had long
wished to do; and then they were all presented, and he said exactly
the right thing to every one."
Disraeli began his career, as I have pointed out in the earlier part of
this essay, as a purveyor of entertainment to the public in a popular
and not very dignified kind. He contended with the crowd of fashionable
novelists whose books consoled the leisure of Mrs. Wititterly as she
reclined on the drawing-room sofa. He found rivals in Bulwer and Mrs.
Gore, and a master in Plumer Ward. His brilliant stories sold, but at
first they won him little advantage. Slowly, by dint of his inherent
force of genius, his books have not merely survived their innumerable
fellows, but they have come to represent to us the form and character of
a whole school; nay, more, they have come to take the place in our
memories of a school which, but for them, would have utterly passed away
and been forgotten. Disraeli, accordingly, is unique, not merely because
his are the only fashionable novels of the pre-Victorian era which any
one ever reads nowadays, but because in his person that ineffable manner
of the "thirties" reaches an isolated sublimity and finds a permanent
place in literature. But if we take a still wider view of the literary
career of Disraeli, we are bound to perceive that the real source of the
interest which his brilliant books continue to possess is the evidence
their pages reveal of the astonishing personal genius of the man. Do
what we will, we find ourselves looking beyond Contarini Fleming and
Sidonia and Vivian Grey to the adventurous Jew who, by dint of infinite
resolution and an energy which never slept, conquered all the prejudices
of convention, and trod English society beneath his foot in the
triumphant irony of success. It is the living Disraeli who is always
more salient than the most fascinating of his printed pages.
Dear Lady Burghclere,
When we met for the first time after the death of our friend, you
desired me to produce what you were kind enough to call "one of my
portraits." But the art of the portrait-writer is capricious, and
at that time I felt wholly disinclined for the adventure. I excused
myself on the ground that the three thick volumes of her
reminiscences made a further portrait needless, and I reflected,
though I did not say, that the difficulties of presenting the
evanescent charm and petulant wit of Lady Dorothy were insuperable.
I partly think so still, but your command has lingered in my memory
all these months, and I have determined to attempt to obey you,
although what I send you can be no "portrait," but a few leaves
torn out of a painter-writer's sketch-book.
The existence of the three published volumes does, after all, not
preclude a more intimate study, because they are confessedly
exterior. They represent what she saw and heard, not what others
perceived in her. In the first place, they are very much better
written than she would have written them herself. I must dwell
presently on the curious fact that, with all her wit, she
possessed no power of sustained literary expression. Her Memoirs
were composed, as you know, by Mr. Ralph Nevill, who is a practised
writer and not otherwise could they have been given to the public.
On this point her own evidence is explicit. She wrote to me, in all
the excitement of the success of the volume of 1906: "The Press has
been wonderfully good to my little efforts, but to Ralph the better
part is due, as, out of the tangled remnants of my brain, he
extracted these old anecdotes of my early years." This is as
bravely characteristic of her modesty as it is of her candour, but
I think it shows that there is still room for some record of the
more intimate features of her charming and elusive character. I
take up my pencil, but with little hope of success, since no more
formidable task could be set me. I will at least try to be, as she
would have scorned me for not being, sincere.
My friendship with Lady Dorothy Nevill occupied more than a quarter
of a century. I met her first in the house of Sir Redvers and Lady
Audrey Buller in the winter of 1887, soon after their return from
Ireland. She had done me the great honour of desiring that I should
be invited to meet her. She had known my venerable relative, the
zoologist, Thomas Bell of Selborne, and she had corresponded in
years long past, about entomology, with my father. We talked
together on that first occasion for hours, and it seems to me that
I was lifted, without preliminaries, into her intimacy. From that
afternoon, until I drank tea with her for the last time, ten days
before her death, the precious link was never loosened.
In 1887, her great social popularity had not begun. She was, I now
know, already near sixty, but it never occurred to me to consider
her age. She possessed a curious static quality, a perennial
youthfulness. Every one must have observed how like Watts' picture
of her at twenty she still was at eighty-six. This was not
preserved by any arts or fictile graces. She rather affected,
prematurely, the dress and appearance of an elderly woman. I
remember her as always the same, very small and neat, very pretty
with her chiselled nose, the fair oval of her features, the
slightly ironic, slightly meditative smile, the fascinating colour
of the steady eyes, beautifully set in the head, with the eyebrows
rather lifted as in a perpetual amusement of curiosity. Her head,
slightly sunken into the shoulders, was often poised a little
sideways, like a bird's that contemplates a hemp-seed. She had no
quick movements, no gestures; she held herself very still. It
always appeared to me that, in face of her indomitable energy and
love of observation, this was an unconscious economy of force. It
gave her a very peculiar aspect; I remember once frivolously saying
to her that she looked as though she were going to "pounce" at me;
but she never pounced. When she had to move, she rose energetically
and moved with determination, but she never wasted a movement. Her
physical strength--and she such a tiny creature--seemed to be
wonderful. She was seldom unwell, although, like most very healthy
people, she bewailed herself with exaggerated lamentations whenever
anything was the matter with her. But even on these occasions she
defied what she called "coddling." Once I found her suffering from
a cold, on a very chilly day, without a fire, and I expostulated.
She replied, with a sort of incongruity very characteristic of her,
"Oh! none of your hot bottles for me!" In her last hours of
consciousness she battled with the doctor's insistence that she
must have a fire in her bedroom, and her children had to conceal
the flame behind screens because she threatened to get out of bed
and put it out. Her marvellous physical force has to be insisted
on, for it was the very basis of her character.
Her humorous petulance, her little sharp changes of voice, the
malice of her downcast eyes, the calmness of her demure and easy
smile--how is any impression to be given of things so fugitive?
Her life, which had not been without its troubles and anxieties,
became one of prolonged and intense enjoyment. I think that this
was the main reason of the delight which her company gave to almost
every one. She was like a household blaze upon a rainy day, one
stretched out one's hands to be warmed. She guarded herself against
the charge of being amiable. "It would be horrid to be amiable,"
she used to say, and, indeed, there was always a touch of sharpness
about her. She was amused once because I told her she was like an
acidulated drop, half sweet and half sour. "Oh! any stupid woman
can be sweet," she said, "it's often another name for imbecile."
She had curious little prejudices and antipathies. I never fathomed
the reason of her fantastic horror of the feasts of the Church,
particularly of Christmas. She always became curiously agitated as
the month of December waned. In her notes she inveighed, in quaint
alarm, against the impending "Christmas pains and penalties." I
think she disliked the disturbance of social arrangements which
these festivals entailed. But there was more than that. She was
certainly a little superstitious, in a mocking, eighteenth-century
sort of way, as Madame du Deffand might have been. She constantly
said, and still more frequently wrote, "D.V." after any project,
even of the most frivolous kind. The idea was that one should be
polite all round, in case of any contingency. When she was in the
Riviera, she was much interested to hear that the Prince of Monaco
had built and endowed a handsome church at Monte Carlo. "Very
clever of him," she said, "for you never can tell."
Lady Dorothy's entire absence of affectation was eminently
attractive. She would be mistress of herself, though China fell.
Her strange little activities, her needlework, her paperwork, her
collections, were the wonder of everybody, but she did not require
approval; she adopted them, in the light of day, for her own
amusement. She never pushed her peculiarities on the notice of
visitors, but, at the same time, if discovered in the act of some
incredible industry, she went on with it calmly. When she was in
Heidelberg in 1892 and successive years, what interested her was
the oddity of the students' life; she expatiated to me on their
beer and their sabre-cuts. Whenever I went abroad of late years, I
was exhorted to send her picture post-cards from out-of-the-way
places, and "Remember that I like vulgar ones best," she added
imperturbably. The story is perhaps known to you of how, in a
circle of superfine ladies, the conversation turned to food, and
the company outdid one another in protestations of delicacy. This
one could only touch a little fruit, and that one was practically
confined to a cup of tea. Lady Dorothy, who had remained silent and
detached, was appealed to as to her opinion. In a sort of loud
cackling--a voice she sometimes surprisingly adopted--she replied,
"Oh, give me a blow-out of tripe and onions!" to the confusion of
the _précieuses_. She had a wholesome respect for food, quite
orthodox and old-fashioned, although I think she ate rather
markedly little. But she liked that little good. She wrote to me
once from Cannes, "This is not an intellectual place, but then the
body rejoices in the cooking, and thanks God for that." She liked
to experiment in foods, and her guests sometimes underwent strange
surprises. One day she persuaded old Lord Wharncliffe, who was a
great friend of hers, to send her a basket of guinea-pig, and she
entertained a very distinguished company on a fricassee of this
unusual game. She refused to say what the dish was until every one
had heartily partaken, and then Mr. George Russell turned suddenly
pale and fled from the room. "Nothing but fancy," remarked the
hostess, composedly. When several years ago there was a proposal
that we should feed upon horse-flesh, and a purveyor of that dainty
opened a shop in Mayfair, Lady Dorothy was one of the first of his
customers. She sallied forth in person, followed by a footman with
a basket, and bought a joint in the presence of a jeering populace.
She had complete courage and absolute tolerance. Sometimes she
pretended to be timid or fanatical, but that was only her fun. Her
toleration and courage would have given her a foremost place among
philanthropists or social reformers, if her tendencies had been
humanitarian. She might have been another Elizabeth Fry, another
Florence Nightingale. But she had no impulse whatever towards
active benevolence, nor any interest in masses of men and women.
And, above all, she was not an actor, but a spectator in life, and
she evaded, often with droll agility, all the efforts which people
made to drag her into propagandas of various kinds. She listened to
what they had to say, and she begged for the particulars of
specially awful examples of the abuses they set out to remedy. She
was all sympathy and interest, and the propagandist started with
this glittering ally in tow; but he turned, and where was she? She
had slipped off, and was in contemplation of some other scheme of
experience.
She described her life to me, in 1901, as a "treadmill of
friendship, perpetually on the go"; and later she wrote: "I am
hampered by perpetual outbursts of hospitality in every shape."
Life was a spectacle to her, and society a congeries of little
_guignols_, at all of which she would fain be seated, in a front
stall. If she complained that hospitality "hampered" her, it was
not that it interfered with any occupation or duty, but simply that
she could not eat luncheon at three different houses at once. I
remember being greatly amused when I congratulated her on having
enjoyed some eminent public funeral, by her replying, grudgingly:
"Yes--but I lost another most interesting ceremony through its
being at the same hour." She grumbled: "People are tugging me to
go and see things," not from any shyness of the hermit or
reluctance to leave her home, but simply because she would gladly
have yielded to them all. "Such a nuisance one can't be in two
places at once, like a bird!" she remarked to me.
In this relation, her attitude to country life was droll. After
long indulgence in her amazing social energy in London, she would
suddenly become tired. The phenomenon never ceased to surprise her;
she could not recollect that she had been tired before, and this
must be the end of all things. She would fly to the country; to
Dorsetshire, to Norfolk, to Haslemere, to what she called "the
soberness of Ascot." Then would come letters describing the bliss
of rural calm. "Here I am! Just in time to save my life. For the
future, no clothes and early hours." That lasted a very short
while. Then a letter signed "Your recluse, D.N.," would show the
dawn of a return to nature. Then _boutades_ of increasing vehemence
would mark the rising impatience. Sept 12: "How dreadful it is that
the country is so full of ladies." Sept. 15: "I am surrounded by
tall women and short women, all very tiresome." Sept. 20: "So dull
here, except for one pleasant episode of a drunken housemaid."
Sept. 23: "Oh! I am so longing for the flesh-pots of dear dirty old
London"; and then one knew that her return to Charles Street would
not be long delayed. She was very fond indeed of country life, for
a short time, and she was interested in gardens, but she really
preferred streets. "Eridge is such a paradise--especially the
quadrupeds," she once wrote to me from a house in which she found
peculiar happiness. But she liked bipeds best.
However one may postpone the question, sooner or later it is
necessary to consider the quality of Lady Dorothy Nevill's wit,
since all things converge in her to that. But her wit is so
difficult to define that it is not surprising that one avoids, as
long as possible, coming actually to grips with it. We may lay the
foundation of a formula, perhaps, by saying that it was a compound
of solid good sense and an almost reckless whimsicality of speech.
The curious thing about it was that it was not markedly
intellectual, and still less literary. It had not the finish of
such wit as is preserved in anthologies of humour. Every one who
enjoyed the conversation of Lady Dorothy must have perceived with
annoyance how little he could take away with him. Her phrases did
not often recur to please that inward ear, "which is the bliss of
solitude." What she said seemed at the time to be eminently right
and sane; it was exhilarating to a high degree; it was lighted up
by merriment, and piquancy, and salt; but it was the result of a
kind of magic which needed the wand of the magician; it could not