Produced by Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)
poem from their places on the individual pages to aid in the flow of
the poems]
The
Choise of Valentines
viii., 295 b, circa 1680) and Bodleian (Rawl. MS. Poet 216, leaves
Edited by
Nash's "CHOISE OF VALENTINES" has apparently come down to us only in
manuscript form. It is extremely doubtful (Oldys notwithstanding[a]),
whether the poem was ever before accorded the dignity of print. Nor
would it now be deemed worthy of such were the only considerations
those of literary merit or intrinsic value: truth to tell there is
little of either to recommend it. But, as it has been repeatedly said,
and well insisted on, the world cannot afford to lose any "document"
whatsoever which bears, or _may_ bear, in the slightest degree, on the
story of its own growth and development, and out of which its true
life has to be written. Especially is even the meanest Elizabethan of
importance and value in relation to the re-construction--still far
from complete--of the life and times of the immortal bard of Avon. In
the most unlikely quarters a quarry may yet be found from which the
social historian may obtain a valuable sidelight on manners and
customs, the philologist a new lection or gloss, or the antiquary a
solution to some, as yet, unsolved problem.
"The Choise of Valentines" claims attention, and is of value
principally on two grounds, either of which, it is held, should amply
justify the more permanent preservation now accorded this otherwise
insignificant production. In the first place, it appears to have been
dedicated to the Earl of Southampton, the generous patron of letters,
and friend of Shakspeare; and second, it is probably the only example
extant of the kind of hackwork to which Nash was frequently reduced by
"the keenest pangs of poverty."[b] He confesses he was often obliged
"to pen unedifying toys for gentlemen." When Harvey denounced him for
"emulating Aretino's licentiousness" he admitted that poverty had
occasionally forced him to prostitute his pen "in hope of gain" by
penning "amorous Villanellos and Quipasses for new-fangled galiards
and newer Fantisticos." In fact, he seems rarely to have known what it
was to be otherwise than the subject of distress and need. As an
example of these "unedifying toys" the present poem may, without much
doubt, be cited, and an instance in penning which his "hope of gain"
was realised.
It is a matter of history that Nash sought, and succeeded in obtaining
for a time, the patronage of the Earl of Southampton, one of the most
liberal men of his day, and a prominent figure in the declining years
of Elizabeth. "I once tasted," Nash writes in 1593,[c] "the full
spring of the Earl's liberality." Record is also made of a visit paid
by him to Lord Southampton and Sir George Carey, while the former was
Governor, and the latter Captain-General, of the Isle of Wight.
From internal evidence it would seem that this poem was called forth
by the Earl's bounty to its author. "My muse devorst from deeper (the
_Rawl. MS._ reads _deepest_) care, presents thee with a wanton
elegie;" and further on, the dedication promises "better lines" which
should "ere long" be penned in "honour" of his noble patron. This
promise is renewed in the epilogue:--
"My mynde once purg'd of such lascivious witt,
With purifide words and hallowed verse,
Thy praises in large volumes shall rehearse,
That better maie thy grauer view befitt."
Does this refer to "The Unfortunate Traveller; or, The Life of Jack
Wilton," generally regarded as Nash's most ambitious work, and which
he dedicated to Lord Southampton in 1593? If so, and there is no
evidence to gainsay the conclusion, we can fix the date of the present
poem as, at all events, prior to 17th September of that year, when
"The Unfortunate Traveller" was entered on the Stationers'
Register.[d] This would make Nash contemporaneous, if not prior to,
Shakspeare in offering a tribute to the merits of the young patron
(Southampton at that time was barely twenty years old) of the Muses.
_Venus and Adonis_ was entered on the Register of the Stationers'
Company about five months earlier, on the 18th April, 1593, and barely
more than two months prior to the registration of "The Terrors of the
Night."
It is curious to note that while Shakspeare and Nash both promise
"graver work" and "better lines," they alike select amatory themes for
their first offerings. The promise in Shakspeare's case was redeemed
by the dedication to Southampton of "The Rape of Lucreece," while it
may be assumed, as aforesaid, that Nash followed suit with "The
Unfortunate Traveller."
Nash, however, for some cause or other failed to retain the Earl's
interest; "indeed," says Mr. Sidney Lee, "he did not retain the favour
of any patron long." It is only fair to state, however, that the
withdrawal of Lord Southampton's patronage may not have been due to
any fault or shortcoming on the part of Nash, for there is likewise no
evidence whatever to show that any close intimacy existed between
Southampton and Shakspeare after 1594. Probably there was much else to
claim Lord Southampton's attention--his marriage, and the Essex
rebellion to wit. This, however, leads somewhat wide of the present
work.
So much for the circumstances which appear to have called forth "The
Choise of Valentines." The next consideration is, Has it ever appeared
in print before? Oldys, in his MS. notes to Langbaine's _English
Dramatic Poets_ (_c_. 1738) says:--"Tom Nash certainly wrote and
published a pamphlet upon Dildos. He is accused of it by his
antagonist, Harvey." But he was writing nearly 150 years after the
event, and it is certainly very strange that a production which it
can be shown was well known should, if printed, have so entirely
disappeared. At all events, no copy is at present known to exist.[e]
John Davies of Hereford alludes to it, but leaves it uncertain whether
its destruction occurred in MS. or in print. In his "Papers
Complaint"[f] he writes:--
But O! my soule is vext to thinke how euill
It is abus'd to beare suits to the Deuill.
_Pierse-Pennilesse_ (a _Pies_ eat such a patch)
Made me (agree) that business once dispatch.
And having made me vndergo the shame,
Abusde me further, in the Deuills name:
And made [me] _Dildo_ (dampned Dildo) beare,
Till good men's hate did me in peeces teare.
As regards the manuscript copies there are one or two points worthy of
note. At present we know of two, more or less incomplete, but each of
which supplements, in some degree, the other. These MSS. are
respectively in the Bodleian (Rawl. MS. Poet, 216) and the Inner
Temple (Petyt MS. 538, vol. 43, p. viii., 295b.) libraries. Both texts
are obviously corrupt, the Rawlinson abominably so. Probably the
former was written out from memory alone, while the Petyt, if not a
transcript direct from the original is, at any rate, very near to it.
The Bodleian version is written on paper in a small oblong
leather-covered book, originally with clasps. The penmanship is early
libris_ Matt. Postlethwayt, Aug. 1, 1697. Perhaps (earlier) Henry
Price owned the book." The volume contains besides an English
transcript of Ovid's "Arte Amandis" and some amatory poems.[g] The
date of the Petyt text may be about.... It is written in a
miscellaneous, folio, commonplace-book, and in the catalogue it is
described as "an obscene poem, entitled 'The Choosing of Valentines,'
by Thomas Nash. The first 17 lines are printed at p. lx. of the
Preface to vol i. of Mr. Grosart's edition of Nash's works, as if they
formed the whole piece."[h]
Nothing is known of Postlethwayt and Price, who at one time owned the
Rawlinson copy, that throws light on its source. In the Petyt,
however, we get a suppositional explanation of its manifestly purer
text. Petyt, subsequent to his call to the Bar, in 1670, was for many
years Keeper of the Records in the Tower of London. Now we know that
Lord Essex, an intimate friend and connection of the Earl of
Southampton, and like Southampton a generous and discerning patron of
letters, was for some time in the "free custody" of the Lord Keeper of
the Tower. Further, Southampton, who had joined Essex in his
rebellion, had been tried and convicted with his friend, and though
the Queen spared his life, he was not released from the Tower until
the ascension of James I. It is not unlikely, therefore, that a copy
of Nash's manuscript made for Lord Essex passed, on the execution of
the latter, with other papers and documents, into the official custody
of the Lord Keeper, to be subsequently unearthed by his successor,
Petyt, who, with a taste for the "curious," had it copied for his own
edification. This supposition is further borne out as follows: The
particular commonplace book in which this poem occurs has been written
by various hands. In the same handwriting as, and immediately
preceding "The Choise of Valentines," are two poetical effusions
dedicated "To the Earl of Essex," both apparently written when he was
in prison and under sentence of death. The other contents of the
volume are likewise contemporaneous.
All things considered, then, the Petyt text, although transcribed
about fifty years later, has weightier claims to attention than the
version in the Rawlinson MSS. I have, therefore, adopted the former as
a basis, giving the Rawlinson variations in the form of notes. A few
of these are obviously better readings than those of the Petyt text:
the reader cannot fail to distinguish these. In the main, however, the
Inner Temple version will be found consistent with its particular
dedication, whilst the Rawlinson variations appear due to an attempt,
signally unsuccessful, to adapt the poem for general use.
For the rest I have faithfully adhered to the original in the basic
text, and in the variorum readings, except in one particular. The
Rawlinson _MS._ is altogether guiltless of punctuation, while the
Petyt copy has been carelessly "stopped" by the scribe: I have
therefore given modern punctuation.
"Unfortunate Traveller," speaks of it as his "first offering." This,
however, must be taken rather as meaning his first _serious_ effort in
acknowledgment of his patron's bounty, for in "The Terrors of the
Night" (registered on the 30th June, 1593), he somewhat effusively
acknowledges his indebtedness to Lord Southampton:--"Through him my
tender wainscot studie doore is delivered from much assault and
battrie: through him I looke into, and am looked on in the world: from
whence otherwise I were a wretched banished exile. Through him all my
good is conueighed vnto me; and to him all my endeavours shall be
contributed as to the ocean." Again, as evidence that Nash had
addressed himself to Southampton prior to his dedication of "The
Unfortunate Traveller," we glean from his promise ("Terrors of the
Night") "to embroyder the rich store of his eternal renoune" in "some
longer Tractate."
the controversy between Nash and Harvey became so notorious that in
Harvey's books be taken wheresoever they may be found and that none of
the said books be ever printed hereafter" (COOPER, _Athenae Cant._ ii.
Song" (Section 2, _Merry Songs and Ballads_, Series 1).
Choise of Valentines," and Dr. Grosart purports to give the first
eighteen lines, but in transcription he has omitted line 4.
honorable the Lord S.[i]
Pardon, _sweete flower of Matchles poetrie,
And fairest bud the red rose euer bare;
Although my Muse, devorst from deeper care,
Presents thee with a wanton Elegie.                                4
Ne blame my verse of loose unchastitie
For painting forth the things that hidden are,
Since all men acte what I in speache declare,
Onlie induced with varietie.                                       8
Complants and praises euery one can write,
And passion out their pangu's in statlie rimes;
But of loues pleasures none did euer write,
That have succeeded in theis latter times.                        12
Accept of it, Deare Lord, in gentle gree,
And better lynes, ere long, shall honor thee._
*       *       *       *       *
Titchfield. The dedication is absent in the Rawlinson text: _cf._
variorum reading in line 13.
notoriously impecunious all through his life, and probably reference
is here made to some bounty received at the hands of Lord Southampton
(_see_ Introduction). What patronage meant at times is gleaned from
Florio's dedication of _The Worlde of Wordes_ in 1598 to the same
nobleman. He says:--"In truth I acknowledge an entire debt, not only
of my best knowledge, but of all; yea, of more than I know, or care,
to your bounteous lordship, in whose pay and patronage I have lived
some years.... But, as to me, and many more, the glorious and gracious
sunshine of your honour hath infused light and life." Rowe also tells
a story of Lord Southampton's munificence to Shakspeare. It is said
that he gave the poet L1,000 (equal to L12,000 now-a-days) to complete
a special purchase. Whether this story be true or not, it is certain
that Lord Southampton was a most liberal patron of letters.
sith most men marke; _speache declare_, speech descrie; _Onlie_, only;
_varietie_, varyetye.
rimes_, statly rime.
absence of the dedication in the Rawl. MS. "_Accept ... in gentle
gree_," to take kindly.
Introduction).
It was the merie moneth of Februarie,
When yong men, in their iollie roguerie,
Rose earelie in the morne fore breake of daie,
To seeke them valentines soe trimme and gaie;                      4
With whom they maie consorte in summer sheene,
And dance the haidegaies on our toune-greene,
As alas at Easter, or at Pentecost,
Perambulate the fields that flourish most;                         8
And goe to som village abbordring neere,
To taste the creame and cakes and such good cheere;
Or see a playe of strange moralitie,
Shewen by Bachelrie of Maningtree.                                12
Where to, the contrie franklins flock-meale swarme,
And Jhon and Jone com marching arme in arme.
Euen on the hallowes of that blessed Saint
That doeth true louers with those ioyes acquaint,                 16
I went, poore pilgrime, to my ladies shrine,
To see if she would be my valentine;
But woe, alass, she was not to be found,
For she was shifted to an upper ground:                           20
Good Justice Dudgeon-haft, and crab-tree face,
With bills and staues had scar'd hir from the place;
And now she was compel'd, for Sanctuarie,
To flye unto a house of venerie.                                  24
Thither went I, and bouldlie made enquire
If they had hackneis to lett-out to hire,
And what they crau'd, by order of their trade,
To lett one ride a iournie on a iade.                             28
Therwith out stept a foggy three-chinnd dame,
That us'd to take yong wenches for to tame,
And ask't me if I ment as I profest,
Or onelie ask't a question but in iest.                           32
"In iest?" quoth I; "that terme it as you will;
I com for game, therefore give me my Jill."
"Why Sir," quoth shee, "if that be your demande,
Com, laye me a Gods-pennie in my hand;                            36
For, in our oratorie siccarlie,
None enters heere, to doe his nicarie,
But he must paye his offertorie first,
And then, perhaps, wee'le ease him of his thirst."                40
I, hearing hir so ernest for the box,
Gave hir hir due, and she the dore unlocks.
In am I entered: "venus be my speede!
But where's this female that must do this deed"?                  44
By blinde meanders, and by crankled wayes,
Shee leades me onward, (as my Aucthor saies),
Vntill we came within a shadie loft
Where venus bounsing vestalls skirmish oft;                       48
And there shee sett me in a leather chaire,
And brought me forth, of prettie Trulls, a paire,
To chuse of them which might content myne eye;
But hir I sought, I could nowhere espie.                          52
I spake them faire, and wisht them well to fare--
"Yet soe yt is, I must haue fresher ware;
Wherefore, dame Bawde, as daintie as you bee,
Fetch gentle mistris Francis forth to me."                        56
"By Halliedame," quoth she, "and Gods oune mother,
I well perceaue you are a wylie brother;
For if there be a morsell of more price,
You'll smell it out, though I be nare so nice.                    60
As you desire, so shall you swiue with hir,
But think, your purse-strings shall abye-it deare;
For, he that will eate quailes must lauish crounes,
And Mistris Francis, in her veluett gounes,                       64
And ruffs and perwigs as fresh as Maye,
Can not be kept with half a croune a daye."
"Of price, good hostess, we will not debate,
Though you assize me at the highest rate;                         68
Onelie conduct me to this bonnie bell.
And tenne good gobbs I will unto thee tell,
Of golde or siluer, which shall lyke thee best,
So much doe I hir companie request."                              72
Awaie she went: so sweete a thing is golde,
That (mauger) will inuade the strongest holde.
"Hey-ho! she coms, that hath my hearte in keepe
Sing Lullabie, my cares, and falle a-sleepe."                     76
Sweeping she coms, as she would brush the ground;
Hir ratling silkes my sences doe confound.
"Oh, I am rauisht: voide the chamber streight;
For I must neede's upon hir with my weight."                      80
"My Tomalin," quoth shee, and then she smilde.
"I, I," quoth I, "soe more men are beguild
With smiles, with flatt'ring wordes, and fained cheere,
When in their deedes their falsehood doeth appeare."              84
"As how, my lambkin," blushing, she replide,
"Because I in this dancing schoole abide?
If that it be, that breede's this discontent,
We will remoue the camp incontinent:                              88
For shelter onelie, sweete heart, came I hither,
And to auoide the troblous stormie weather;
But now the coaste is cleare, we will be gonne,
Since, but thy self, true louer I haue none."                     92
With that she sprung full lightlie to my lips,
And fast about the neck me colle's, and clips;
She wanton faints, and falle's vpon hir bedd,
And often tosseth too and fro hir head;                           96
She shutts hir eyes, and waggles with her tongue:
"Oh, who is able to abstaine so long?"
"I com! I com! sweete lyning be thy leaue:"
Softlie my fingers up theis curtaine heaue,                      100
And make me happie, stealing by degreese.
First bare hir leggs, then creepe up to hir kneese;
From thence ascend unto her mannely thigh--
(A pox on lingring when I am so nighe!).                         104
Smock, climbe a-pace, that I maie see my ioyes;
Oh heauen and paradize are all but toyes
Compar'd with this sight I now behould,
Which well might keepe a man from being olde.                    108
A prettie rysing wombe without a weame,
That shone as bright as anie siluer streame;
And bare out like the bending of an hill,
At whose decline a fountaine dwelleth still;                     112
That hath his mouth besett with uglie bryers,
Resembling much a duskie nett of wyres;
A loftie buttock, barrd with azure veines,
Whose comelie swelling, when my hand distreines,                 116
Or wanton checketh with a harmlesse stype,
It makes the fruites of loue oftsoone be rype,
And pleasure pluckt too tymelie from the stemme
To dye ere it hath seene Jerusalem.                              120
O Gods! that euer anie thing so sweete,
So suddenlie should fade awaie, and fleete!
Hir armes are spread, and I am all unarm'd,
Lyke one with Ouid's cursed hemlocke charm'd;                    124
So are my Limms unwealdlie for the fight
That spend their strength in thought of hir delight.
What shall I doe to shewe my self a man?
It will not be for ought that beawtie can.                       128
I kisse, I clap, I feele, I view at will,
Yett dead he lyes, not thinking good or ill.
"Unhappie me," quoth shee, "and wilt' not stand?
Com, lett me rubb and chafe it with my hand!                     132
Perhaps the sillie worme is labour'd sore,
And wearied that it can doe noe more;
If it be so, as I am greate a-dread,
I wish tenne thousand times that I were dead.                    136
How ere it is, no meanes shall want in me,
That maie auaile to his recouerie."
Which saide, she tooke and rould it on hir thigh,
And when she look't on't, she would weepe and sighe;             140
She dandled it, and dancet it up and doune,
Not ceasing till she rais'd it from his swoune.
And then he flue on hir as he were wood,
And on hir breeche did hack and foyne a-good;                    144
He rub'd, and prickt, and pierst her to the bones,
Digging as farre as eath he might for stones;
Now high, now lowe, now stryking shorte and thicke;
Now dyuing deepe, he toucht hir to the quicke;                   148
Now with a gird he would his course rebate,
Straite would he take him to a statlie gate;
Plaie while him list, and thrust he neare so hard,
Poore pacient Grissill lyeth at hir warde,                       152
And giue's, and takes, as blythe and free as Maye,
And ere-more meete's him in the midle waye.
On him hir eyes continualy were fixt;
With hir eye-beames his melting looke's were mixt,               156
Which, like the Sunne, that twixt two glasses plaies,
From one to th' other cast's rebounding rayes.
He, lyke a starre that, to reguild his beames
Sucks-in the influence of Phebus streames,                       160
Imbathes the lynes of his descending light
In the bright fountaines of hir clearest sight.
She, faire as fairest Planet in the skye,
Hir puritie to noe man doeth denye;                              164
The verie chamber that enclouds her shine
Lookes lyke the pallace of that God deuine,
Who leades the daie about the Zodiake,
And euerie euen discends to th'oceane lake;                      168
So fierce and feruent is her radiance,
Such fyrie stakes she darts at euerie glance
As might enflame the icie limmes of age,
And make pale death his seignedrie to aswage;                    172
To stand and gaze upon her orient lamps,
Where Cupid all his chiefest ioyes encamps,
And sitts, and playes with euery atomie
That in hir Sunne-beames swarme aboundantlie.                    176
Thus gazing, and thus striuing, we perseuer:
But what so firme that maie continue euer?
"Oh not so fast," my rauisht Mistriss cryes,
"Leaste my content, that on thy life relyes,                     180
Be brought too-soone from his delightfull seate,
And me unwares of hoped bliss defeate.
Together lett us marche unto content,
And be consumed with one blandishment."                          184
As she prescrib'd so kept we crotchet-time,
And euerie stroake in ordre lyke a chyme,
Whilst she, that had preseru'd me by hir pittie,
Unto our musike fram'd a groaning dittie.                        188
"Alass! alass! that loue should be a sinne!
Euen now my blisse and sorrowe doeth beginne.
Hould wyde thy lapp, my louelie Danae,
And entretaine the golden shoure so free,                        192
That trikling falles into thy treasurie.
As Aprill-drops not half so pleasant be,
Nor Nilus overflowe to AEgipt plaines
As this sweet-streames that all hir ioints imbaynes.             196
With "Oh!" and "Oh!" she itching moues hir hipps,
And to and fro full lightlie starts and skips:
She ierkes hir leggs, and sprauleth with hir heeles;
No tongue maie tell the solace that she feeles,                  200
"I faint! I yeald! Oh, death! rock me a-sleepe!
Sleepe! sleepe desire! entombed in the deepe!"
"Not so, my deare," my dearest saint replyde,
"For, from us yett, thy spirit maie not glide                    204
Untill the sinnowie channels of our blood
Without their source from this imprisoned flood;
And then will we (that then will com too soone),
Dissolued lye, as though our dayes were donne."                  208
The whilst I speake, my soule is fleeting hence,
And life forsakes his fleshie residence.
Staie, staie sweete ioye, and leaue me not forlorne
Why shouldst thou fade that art but newelie borne?               212
"Staie but an houre, an houre is not so much:
But half an houre; if that thy haste is such,
Naie, but a quarter--I will aske no more--
That thy departure (which torments me sore),                     216
Maie be alightned with a little pause,
And take awaie this passions sudden cause."
He heare's me not; hard-harted as he is,
He is the sonne of Time, and hates my blisse.                    220
Time nere looke's backe, the riuers nere returne;
A second springe must help me or I burne.
No, no, the well is drye that should refresh me,
The glasse is runne of all my destinie:                          224
Nature of winter learneth nigardize
Who, as he ouer-beares the streame with ice
That man nor beaste maie of their pleasance taste,
So shutts she up hir conduit all in haste,                       228
And will not let hir Nectar ouer-flowe,
Least mortall man immortall ioyes should knowe.
Adieu! unconstant loue, to thy disporte
Adieu! false mirth, and melodie too short;                       232
Adieu! faint-hearted instrument of lust;
That falselie hath betrayde our equale trust.
Hence-forth no more will I implore thine ayde,
Or thee, or man of cowardize upbrayde.                           236
My little dilldo shall suply their kinde:
A knaue, that moues as light as leaues by winde;
That bendeth not, nor fouldeth anie deale,
But stands as stiff as he were made of steele;                   240
And playes at peacock twixt my leggs right blythe,
And doeth my tickling swage with manie a sighe.
For, by saint Runnion! he'le refresh me well;
And neuer make my tender bellie swell.                           244
Poore Priapus! whose triumph now must falle,
Except thou thrust this weakeling to the walle.
Behould! how he usurps, in bed and bowre
And undermines thy kingdom euerie howre;                         248
How slye he creepes betwixt the barke and tree,
And sucks the sap, whilst sleepe detaineth thee.
He is my Mistris page at euerie stound,
And soone will tent a deepe intrenched wound.                    252
He wayte's on Courtlie Nimphs that be so coye,
And bids them skorne the blynd-alluring boye.
He giues yong guirls their gamesome sustenance,
And euerie gaping mouth his full sufficeance.                    256
He fortifies disdaine with forraine artes,
And wanton-chaste deludes all loving hartes.
If anie wight a cruell mistris serue's,
Or, in dispaire, (unhappie) pines and staru's,                   260
Curse Eunuke dilldo, senceless counterfet
Who sooth maie fill, but never can begett.
But, if revenge enraged with dispaire,
That such a dwarf his wellfare should empaire,                   264
Would faine this womans secretarie knowe,
Lett him attend the markes that I shall showe:
He is a youth almost two handfulls highe,
Streight, round, and plumb, yett hauing but one eye,             268
Wherein the rhewme so feruentlie doeth raigne,
That Stigian gulph maie scarce his teares containe;
Attired in white veluet, or in silk,
And nourisht with whott water, or with milk,                     272
Arm'd otherwhile in thick congealed glasse,
When he, more glib, to hell be lowe would passe.
Vpon a charriot of five wheeles he rydes,
The which an arme strong driuer stedfast guides,                 276
And often alters pace as wayes growe deepe,
(For who, in pathes unknowne, one gate can keepe?)
Sometimes he smoothlie slideth doune the hill;
Another while, the stones his feete doe kill;                    280
In clammie waies he treaddeth by and by,
And plasheth and sprayeth all that be him nye.
So fares this iollie rider in his race,
Plunging and sousing forward in lyke case,                       284
He dasht, and spurted, and he plodded foule,
God giue thee shame, thou blinde mischapen owle!
Fy-fy, for grief: a ladies chamberlaine,
And canst not thou thy tatling tongue refraine?                  288
I reade thee beardles blab, beware of stripes,
And be aduised what thou vainelie pipes;
Thou wilt be whipt with nettles for this geare
If Cicelie shewe but of thy knauerie heere.                      292
Saint Denis shield me from such female sprites!
Regarde not, Dames, what Cupids Poete writes:
I pennd this storie onelie for my selfe,
Who, giuing suck unto a childish Elfe,                           296
And quitte discourag'd in my nurserie,
Since all my store seemes to hir penurie.
I am not as was Hercules the stout,
That to the seaventh iournie could hould out;                    300
I want those hearbe's and rootes of Indian soile,
That strengthen wearie members in their toile--
Druggs and Electuaries of new devise,
Doe shunne my purse, that trembles at the price.                 304
Sufficeth all I haue, I yeald hir hole
Which, for a poore man, is a princelie dole,
I paie our hostess scott and lott at moste,
And looke as leane and lank as anie ghoste;                      308
What can be added more to my renowne?
She lyeth breathlesse; I am taken doune;
The waves doe swell, the tydes climbe or'e the banks;
Judge, gentlemen! if I deserue not thanks?                       312
And so, good night! unto you euer'ie one;
For loe, our thread is spunne, our plaie is donne.
_Claudito iam vinos Priapa, sat prata biberunt_ [sic[j]].
Tho. Nash.
_Thus[k] hath my penne presum'd to please my friend--
Oh mightst thou lykewise please Apollo's eye.
No, Honor brooke's no such impietie,
Yett Ouids wanton Muse did not offend.
He is the fountaine whence my streames doe flowe--
Forgive me if I speake as I was taught,
A lyke to women, utter all I knowe,
As longing to unlade so bad a fraught.
My mynde once purg'd of such lasciuious witt,
With purifide words and hallowed verse,
Thy praises in large volumes shall rehearce,
That better maie thy grauer view befitt.
Meanewhile yett rests, you smile at what I write;
Or, for attempting, banish me your sight._
Thomas Nash.
commences on page 96), are a few lines entitled "The Epilogue," which
are obviously part of the above, albeit more than usually imperfectly
copied. Why so placed does not appear, especially as several blank
pages immediately follow the conclusion of the Bodleian copy.
Title, _The Choosing of Valentines_, Nashes Dildo.
Fr. _joli_, pretty, fine. _Bravery_, finery; _Cf_. Holinshed's _Chron.
of Eng., 55_--The ancient Britons painted their bodies "which they
esteemed a great braverie."
_daie_, daye.
"Manningtree, in Essex, formerly enjoyed the privilege of fairs, by
the tenure of exhibiting a certain number of stage plays yearly. It
appears also, from other intimations, that there were great
festivities there, and much good eating, at Whitsun ales, and other
times."--_Nares._
compeld for Sanctuary.
promiscuous use, _e.g._, a horse, a whore, a literary drudge. _Cf_.
"The hobby-horse is but a colt, and your love perhaps a
hackney."--_Love's Labour Lost_, iii., 1.
three-chinde. Foggie = fat, bloated, having hanging flesh. _Cf_. "Some
three chind foggie dame."--Dolarney, _Primrose_.
be," quoth she, "that you demaunde."
"God's-pennie, an earnest-pennie."--Florio, p. 36.
private chapel or closet for prayer; here a canting term for brothel:
cf. abbess = bawd; nun = whore, and so forth. "Siccarly," certainly,
surely "Thou art here, sykerlye, Thys churche to robb with felonye,"
MS. Cantab Ff. ii., 38, f. 240.
nickery, copulation. Deuory may either be Fr. _devoir_, duty; or
devoure, to ravish, to deflower.
the doare vnlockes.
crooked.
_oft_, omitted.
abide yt deere.
crownes.
gownes.
May.
tell. "Gob, a portion" (H).
_streight_, straight.
sighes and flattering woordes and teares.
she hugges, she calles, she clippes. "Coll" or "cull," to kiss, to
embrace; so also "clip."
lett my fingers heaue.
degrees.
the feete, and then vnto the kneese.
this.
blemish.
seize, to touch.
enioye the vsed thinge.
were spredd, But I was all vnarmed.
laboured.
dread.
downe on it, did groane and sighe.
redounding.
ocean.
every glaunce.
gazeing, we perseuere.
hope defeates. Here occur two lines in the Rawl. MS. which do not
appear in the Petyt MS., as follows:
Togeather lett our equall motions stirr,
Togeather lett vs liue and dye, my deare;
with one contente.
languishmente.
and.
pittye.
her woombe destreynes.
trickling moues her lippes.
startes and skippes.
death, rocke mee.
pleasure must.
prisoned.
soe
a litle pawse.
more implore thine.
vpprayd.
sterue.
raine.
follow, in the Rawl. MS., lines 290-93 of the Petyt; lines 292-3 being
also reversed in the Rawl. text.
steadfastly him.
slippeth downe a.
by.
beplotted.
ladyes chamberlayne.
actuall Elfe.
of newe devises.
_price_, prices. In the Rawl. MS., lines 307-8 of the Petyt MS. follow
here.
I payd the wole.
allmost.
thankes.