or, AMOURS
By Ovid
Literally Translated into English Prose, with Copious Notes, by Henry T. Riley
now be no pleasure to thee to read us; still, the labour will be less,
the two being removed.
_He says that he is compelled by Cupid to write of love instead of
battles and that the Divinity insists on making each second Hexameter
line into a Pentameter._
|I was preparing to write of arms and impetuous warfare in serious
second verse was of equal measure with the first; but Cupid is said to
has given thee this right over my lines? We poets are the choir of _the
Muses,_ the Pierian maids, not thine. What if Venus were to seize the
arms of the yellow-haired Minerva, _and_ if the yellow-haired Minerva
were to wave the lighted torches _of Love?_ Who would approve of Ceres
holding her reign in the woods on the mountain ridges, _or_ of the
fields being tilled under the control of the quivered Virgin? Who would
arm Phoebus, graceful with his locks, with the sharp spear, while Mars
is striking the Aonian lyre? Thy sway, O youth, is great, and far too
potent; why, in thy ambition, dost thou attempt a new task? Is that
which is everywhere, thine? Is Heliconian Tempe thine? Is even his own
lyre hardly safe now for Phoebus? When the new page has made a good
beginning in the first line, at that moment does he diminish my
whether youth, or girl with her flowing locks arranged."
selected the arrows made for my destruction; and he stoutly bent upon
his knee the curving bow, and said, "Poet, receive a subject on which to
sing." Ah wretched me! unerring arrows did that youth possess. I
burn; and in my heart, _hitherto_ disengaged, does Love hold sway.
close. Farewell, ye ruthless wars, together with your numbers. My Muse,
sea shore thy temples encircled with their yellow _locks_.
_He says, that being taken captive by Love, he allows Cupid to lead him
away in triumph._
|Why shall I say it is, that my bed appears thus hard to me, and that my
clothes rest not upon the couch? The night, too, long as it is, have
I passed without sleep; and why do the weary bones of my restless body
ache? But were I assailed by any flame, I think I should be sensible of
it. Or does _Love_ come unawares and cunningly attack in silent ambush?
'Tis so; his little arrows have pierced my heart; and cruel Love is
tormenting the breast he has seized.
Am I to yield? Or by struggling _against it_, am I to increase this
sudden flame? I must yield; the burden becomes light which is borne
contentedly. I have seen the flames increase when agitated by waving the
torch; and when no one shook it, I have seen them die away. The galled
bulls suffer more blows while at first they refuse the yoke, than
those whom experience of the plough avails. The horse which is unbroken
bruises his mouth with the hard curb; the one that is acquainted with
arms is less sensible of the bit. Love goads more sharply and much
more cruelly those who struggle, than those who agree to endure his
servitude. Lo! I confess it; I am thy new-made prey, O Cupid; I am
extending my conquered hands for thy commands. No war _between us_ is
needed; I entreat for peace and for pardon; and no credit shall I be to
thee, unarmed, conquered by thy arms. Bind thy locks with myrtle; yoke
which becomes thee. And in the chariot _so_ given thee, thou shalt
the captive fair shall be led _in triumph_; this procession shall be
a splendid triumph for thee. I myself, a recent capture, shall bear
my wound _so_ lately made; and with the feelings of a captive shall I
endure thy recent chains. Soundness of Understanding shall-be led along
with hands bound behind his back, Shame as well, and whatever _beside_
is an enemy to the camp of Love. All things shall stand in awe of thee:
towards thee the throng, stretching forth its hands, shall sing "Io
triumphe" with loud voice. Caresses shall be thy attendants, Error too,
and Madness, a troop that ever follows on thy side. With these for thy
soldiers, thou dost overcome both men and Gods; take away from thee
these advantages, _and_ thou wilt be helpless. From highest Olympus thy
joyous mother will applaud thee in thy triumph, and will sprinkle her
roses falling on thy face. While gems bedeck thy wings, _and_ gems thy
hair; in thy golden chariot shalt thou go, resplendent thyself with
Then too, (if well I know thee) wilt thou influence not a few; then too,
as thou passest by, wilt thou inflict many a wound. Thy arrows (even
shouldst thou thyself desire it) cannot be at rest. A glowing flame
_ever_ injures by the propinquity of its heat. Just such was Bacchus
birds; he was _that_ of the tigers. Therefore, since I may be some
portion of thy hallowed triumph, forbear, Conqueror, to expend thy
with the same hand with which he conquers does he shield the conquered.
_He entreats his mistress to return his affection, and shows that he is
deserving of her favour._
|I ask for what is just; let the fair who has so lately captivated me,
either love me, or let her give me a cause why I should always love her.
Alas! too much have I desired; only let her allow herself to be loved;
_and then_ Cytherea will have listened to my prayers so numerous. Accept
one who will be your servant through lengthened years; accept one
who knows how to love with constant attachment. If the great names of
ancient ancestors do not recommend me, or if the Equestrian founder of
limits my expenditure; still Phoebus and his nine companions and the
discoverer of the vine may do so; and Love _besides_, who presents me
as a gift to you; a fidelity, too that will yield to none, manners above
reproach, ingenuousness without guile, and modesty _ever_ able to blush.
A thousand damsels have no charms for me; I am no rover in affection;
prove my lot to live with you for years as many as the threads of the
Sister _Destinies_ shall grant me, and to die with you sorrowing _for
me_. Grant me yourself as a delightful theme for my verse; worthy of
their matter my lines will flow. Io, frightened by her horns, and she
stream have a name in song; she, too, who, borne over the seas upon the
fictitious bull, held fast the bending horns with her virgin hand. We,
too, together shall be celebrated throughout all the world; and my name
shall ever be united with thy own.
_He instructs his mistress what conduct to-observe in the presence of
her husband at a feast to which he has been invited._
And am I then only as a guest to look upon the fair so much beloved? And
shall there be another, to take pleasure in being touched _by you?_
And will you, conveniently placed below, be keeping warm the bosom of
upon your neck? Cease to be surprised that the beauteous damsel of Atrax
_on table_. No wood is my home, and my limbs adhere not to _those of_
a horse; _yet_ I seem to be hardly able to withhold my hands from you.
Learn, however, what must be done by you; and do not give my injunctions
to be borne away by the Eastern gales, nor on the warm winds of the
South.
Come before your husband; and yet, I do not see what can be done, if
couch, with modest air you will be going as his companion, to recline
and yourself return them. Without utterance will I give expression to
beauteous finger. If there shall be anything, of which you may be making
complaint about me silently in your mind, let your delicate hand reach
from the extremity of your ear. When, my life, I shall either do or say
aught which shall give you delight, let your ring be continually twisted
you shall be wishing many an evil for your husband, who so well deserves
for what _wine_ you wish. I will at once take the cup which you have put
If, perchance, he shall give you any morsels, of which he has tasted
allow him to press your neck, by putting his arms around it; nor recline
allow him to give you no kisses. If you do give him _any_ kisses, I
shall be discovered to be your lover, and I shall say, "Those are my
own," and shall be laying hands upon him.
Still, this I shall _be able to_ see; but what the clothing carefully
conceals, the same will be a cause for me of apprehension full of
doubts. Touch not his thigh with yours, and cross not legs with him, and
do not unite your delicate foot with his uncouth leg. To my misery, I
am apprehensive of many a thing, because many a thing have I done in my
wantonness; and I myself am tormented, through fear of my own precedent.
I forestalled our hurried delights. This, I _am sure_, you will not do
_for him_; but that you may not _even_ be supposed to do so, take away
incessantly, but let there be no kisses with your entreaties; and while
soundly laid asleep with dozing and wine, circumstances and opportunity
will give us _fitting_ counsel. When you shall rise to go home, we all
will rise as well; _and_ remember that you walk in the middle rank of
the throng. In that rank you will either find me, or be found _by me_;
_and_ whatever part of me you can there touch, _mind and_ touch.
Ah wretched me! I have given advice to be good for _but_ a few hours;
_then_, at the bidding of night, I am separated from my mistress. At
night her husband will lock her in; I, sad with my gushing tears, will
follow her as far as I may, even to her obdurate door. _And_ now will he
be snatching a kiss; _and_ now not kisses only will he snatch; you will
be compelled to grant him that, which by stealth you grant to me. But
grant him this (you can do so) with a bad grace, and like one acting by
compulsion; let no caresses be heard; and let Venus prove inauspicious.
If my wishes avail, I trust, too, that he will find no satisfaction
therein; but if otherwise, still at least let it have no delights for
you. But, however, whatever luck may attend upon the night, assure me in
positive language to-morrow, that you did not dally with him.
_The beauties of Corinna._
threw my limbs to be refreshed on the middle of the couch. A part of the
the woods are wont to have; just as the twilight glimmers, when Phoebus
is retreating; or _as_ when the night has gone, and still the day is not
risen. Such light should be given to the bashful fair, in which coy
modesty may hope to have concealment.
did she strive; and, as she struggled as though she was not desirous
to conquer, without difficulty was she overcome, through betrayal
of herself. When, her clothing laid aside, she stood before my eyes,
throughout her whole body nowhere was there a blemish. What shoulders,
what arms I _both_ saw and touched! The contour of her breast, how
formed was it to be pressed! How smooth her stomach beneath her
faultless bosom! How full and how beauteous her sides! How plump with
youthfulness the thigh! _But_ why enlarge on every point? Nothing did I
behold not worthy of praise; and I pressed her person even to my own.
The rest, who knows not? Wearied, we both reclined. May such a midday
often prove my lot.
_He entreats the porter to open to him the door of his mistress's
house._
throw open the stubborn door with its turning hinge. What I ask, is but
a trifle; let the door, half-opened, admit me sideways with its narrow
passage. Protracted Love has made my body thin for such an emergency,
and by diminishing my bulk, has rendered my limbs _quite_ supple.'Tis
'tis he directs my feet that meet no harm. But, at one time, I used
to be afraid of the night and imaginary ghosts; _and_ I used to be
surprised if any one was about to go in the dark: Cupid, with his
graceful mother, laughed, so that I could hear him, and he softly said,
"Thou too wilt become bold." Without delay, love came _upon me_; then,
destruction.
I only fear you, _thus_ too tardy; you alone do I court; you hold the
lightning by which you can effect my destruction. Look (and that you may
see, loosen the obdurate bars) how the door has been made wet with my
tears. At all events, 'twas I, who, when, your garment laid aside, you
as you were trembling. Does then, (O shocking thought!) the credit which
once prevailed in your behalf, now fail to prevail in my own favour?
Give a return for my kindness; you may _now_ be grateful. As you wish,
away the bar. Strike it away then may you one day be liberated from your
of by you. Hard-hearted porter! you hear me, as I implore in vain; the
door, supported by its hard oaken _posts_, is still unmoved. Let the
protection of a closed gate be of value to cities when besieged; _but_
why, in the midst of peace are you dreading warfare? What would you do
to an enemy, who thus shut out the lover? The hours of the night pass
on; from the door-post strike away the bar.
I am not come attended with soldiers and with arms; I should be alone,
if ruthless Love were not here. Him, even if I should desire it, I can
never send away; first should I be even severed from my limbs. Love
chaplet falling from off my anointed hair. Who is to dread arms _such_
as these? Who may not go out to face them? The hours of the night pass
on; from the door-post strike away the bar.
Are you delaying? or does sleep (who but ill befriends the lover)
give to the winds my words, as they are repelled from your ear? But, I
remember, when formerly I used to avoid you, you were awake, with the
stars of the midnight. Perhaps, too, your own mistress is now asleep
with you; alas! how much superior _then_ is your fate to my own! And
since 'tis so, pass on to me, ye cruel chains. The hours of the night
pass on; from the door-post strike away the bar.
Am I mistaken? Or did the door-posts creak with the turning hinge, and
did the shaken door give the jarring signal? Yes, I am mistaken; the
door was shaken by the boisterous wind. Ah me! how far away has that
gust borne my hopes! Boreas, if well thou dost keep in mind the ravished
Orithyia, come hither, and with thy blast beat open this relentless
door. 'Tis silence throughout all the City; damp with the glassy dew,
the hours of the night pass on; from the door-post strike away the bar.
persuasive of no moderation; the first is without shame, Bacchus and
Love _are without fear_.
I have expended every method; neither by entreaties nor by threats have
I moved you, O _man, even_ more deaf yourself than your door. It becomes
you not to watch the threshold of the beauteous fair; of the anxieties
_mortals_ to their work. But, chaplet taken from my locks joyous no
longer, be you the livelong night upon this obdurate threshold. You,
when in the morning she shall see you _thus_ exposed, will be a witness
of my time thus thrown away. _Porter_, whatever your disposition, good
bye, and _one day_ experience the pangs of him who is now departing;
sluggish one, and worthless in not admitting the lover, fare you well.
And you, ye cruel door-posts, with your stubborn threshold; and _you,
_He has beaten his mistress, and endeavours to regain her favour._
|Put my hands in manacles (they are deserving of chains), if any friend
of mine is present, until all my frenzy has departed. For frenzy has
raised my rash arms against my mistress; hurt by my frantic hand, the
fair is weeping. In such case could I have done an injury even to my
dear parents, or have given unmerciful blows to even the hallowed
slaughter the flocks that he had caught along the extended plains?
And did Orestes, the guilty avenger of his father, the punisher of his
And could I then tear her tresses so well arranged; and were not her
displaced locks unbecoming to my mistress? Even thus was she beauteous;
wild beasts of Mænalus with her bow. 'Twere more fitting for her face to
be pale from the impress of kisses, and for her neck to bear the marks
of the toying teeth.
their headlong flight, had borne away both the promises and the sails of
fall in thy temple, except that her locks were bound with the fillet.
Who did not say to me, "You madman!" who did not say _to me_, "You
barbarian!" She herself _said_ not a word; her tongue was restrained
by timid apprehensions. But still her silent features pronounced my
censure; by her tears _and_ by her silent lips did she convict me.
First could I wish that my arms had fallen from off my shoulders; to
better purpose could I have parted with a portion of myself. To my own
disadvantage had I the strength of a madman; and for my own punishment
did I stoutly exert my strength. What do I want with you, ye ministers
of death and criminality? Impious hands, submit to the chains, your due.
of the multitude? _And_ shall I have a greater privilege against my
mistress? The son of Tydeus has left the worst instance of crime: he was
was he; by me, she, whom I asserted to be loved _by me_, was injured;
against an enemy the son of Tydeus was infuriate.
Come now, conqueror, prepare your boastful triumphs; bind your locks
with laurel, and pay your vows to Jove, and let the multitude, the
train, that escorts your chariot, shout aloud, "Io _triumphe!_ by
_this_ valiant man has the fair been conquered!" Let the captive, in her
sadness, go before with dishevelled locks, pale all over, if her hurt
In short, if, after the manner of a swelling torrent, I was impelled,
and if impetuous anger did make me its prey; would it not have been
enough to have shouted aloud at the trembling girl, and not to have
thundered out my threats far too severe? Or else, to my own disgrace, to
have torn her tunic from its upper edge down to the middle? Her girdle
hardness of my heart, I could dare, seizing her hair on her forehead,
amazed, with her features pale and bloodless, just as the marble is
palpitating members; just as when the breeze waves the foliage of the
poplars; just as the slender reed quivers with the gentle Zephyr; or,
as when the surface of the waves is skimmed by the warm South wind. Her
tears, too, so long repressed, flowed down her face, just as the water
flows from the snow when heaped up.
Then, for the first time, did I begin to be sensible that I was guilty;
the tears which she was shedding were _as_ my own blood. Yet, thrice
was I ready, suppliantly to throw myself before her feet; thrice did
she repel my dreaded hands. But, _dearest,_ do not you hesitate, (_for_
revenge will lessen your grief) at once to attack my face with your
nails. Spare not my eyes, nor _yet_ my hair; let anger nerve your hands,
weak though they may be.
And that tokens so shocking of my criminality may no longer exist, put
_He curses a certain procuress, whom he overhears instructing his
mistress in the arts of a courtesan._
|There is a certain--(whoever wishes to make acquaintance with a
procuress, let him listen.)--There is a certain old hag, Dipsas by name.
she behold the mother of the swarthy Memnon with her horses of roseate
knows right well what the herbs, what the thrums impelled around the
from the prurient mare can effect. When she wills it, the clouds are
overspread throughout all the sky; when she wills it, the day is bright
with a clear atmosphere.
I have beheld (if I may be believed) the stars dripping with blood:
hag's carcase was covered with feathers. _This_ I believe, and such is
proceeds from a twofold eyeball. Forth from the ancient sepulchres she
her long incantations she cleaves the solid ground. She has made it her
occupation to violate the chaste bed; and besides, her tongue is not
"wanting in guilty advocacy. Chance made me the witness of her language;
concealed me.
"You understand, my life, how greatly you yesterday pleased a wealthy
young man; _for_ he stopped short, and stood gazing for some time on
your face. And whom do you not please? Your beauty is inferior to no
one's. _But_ woe is me! your person has not a fitting dress. I _only_
wish you were as well off, as you are distinguished for beauty; if
you became rich, I should not be poor. The adverse star of Mars in
befriending you with her planet. See now how favourable she is on her
approach; a rich lover is sighing for you, and he makes it his care
compare with your own; if he did not wish to have you at a price, he
were worthy himself to be purchased."
faircomplexion indeed; but if you _only_ pretend it, 'tis an advantage;
you are looking full upon your bosom, each man must _only_ be looked at
in the proportion in which he offers. Possibly the sluttish Sabine
to more men _than one_. Now-a-days, Mars employs the bravery _of our
own Æneas. Enjoy yourselves, my pretty ones; she is chaste, whom nobody
has courted; or else, if coyness does not prevent her, she herself is
upon your lofty brow; with those frowns will numerous failings be
the bow; the bow that tested _the strength_ of their sides, was made of
horn. Age glides stealthily on, and beguiles us as it flies; just as the
swift river glides onward with its flowing waters. Brass grows bright by
use; good clothes require to be worn; uninhabited buildings grow white
with nasty mould. Unless you entertain _lovers_, beauty _soon_ waxes
old, with no one to enjoy it; and _even_ one or two _lovers_ are not
sufficiently profitable. From many _of them_, gain is more sure, and not
so difficult to be got. An abundant prey falls to the hoary wolves out
of a _whole_ flock.
"See now! what does this poet of yours make you a present of besides his
last verses? You will read many thousands of them by _this_ new lover.
gold, strikes the harmonious strings of the gilded lyre. He that shall
make you presents, let him be to you greater than great Homer; believe
me, it is a noble thing to give. And, if there shall be any one redeemed
because he is good-looking, ask for a night without a present; _why_,
let him first solicit his own admirer for something to present to you.
"Be less exacting of presents, while you are laying your nets, _for
fear_ lest they should escape you: _once_ caught, tease them at your
own pleasure. Pretended affection, too, is not a bad thing; let him
fancy he is loved; but have you a care that this affection is not all
for nothing. Often refuse your favours; sometimes pretend a head-ache;
admit him again; that he may acquire no habits of endurance, and that
his love, so often repulsed, may not begin to flag. Let your door be
deaf to him who entreats, open to him who brings. Let the lover that is
admitted, hear the remarks of him who is excluded. And, as though you
were the first injured, sometimes get in a passion with him when injured
wear away. But do you never afford a long duration for anger; prolonged
anger frequently produces hatred. Moreover, let your eyes learn, at
discretion, to shed tears; and let this cause or that cause your cheeks
to be wet. And do not, if you deceive any one, hesitate to be guilty of
parts; who may instruct him what may be conveniently purchased for you.
And let them ask but little for themselves; if they ask a little of
Let your sister, and your mother, and your nurse as well, fleece your
admirer. A booty is soon made, that is sought by many hands. When
occasions for asking for presents shall fail you, call attention with a
without a rival; love is not very lasting if you remove _all_ rivalry.
Let him perceive the traces of _another_ person on the couch; all your
neck, too, discoloured by the marks of toying. Especially let him see
the presents, which another has sent. If he gives you nothing, the
things, but yet he has not given you every thing, be continually asking
him to lend you something, for you never to return. Let your tongue aid
you observe these precepts, tried by me throughout a long experience; and
if the winds and the breezes do not bear away my words; often will you
bless me while I live; often will you pray, when I am dead, that in
quietude my bones may repose.".
She was in the middle of her speech, when my shadow betrayed me; but my
hands with difficulty refrained from tearing her grey scanty locks, and
her eyes bleared with wine, and her wrinkled cheeks. May the Gods grant
and everlasting thirst.
_He tells Atticus that like the soldier, the lover ought to be on his
guard and that Love is a species of warfare._
|Every lover is a soldier, and Cupid has a camp of his own; believe me,
war, is suited to love as well. For an old man to be a soldier, is
generals require in the valiant soldier, the same does the charming fair
require in her husband. Both _soldier and lover_ pass sleepless nights;
both rest upon the ground. The one watches at the door of his mistress;
of the soldier; send the fair _far_ away, _and_ the lover will boldly
follow her, without a limit _to his endurance_. Over opposing mountains
will he go, and rivers swollen with rains; the accumulating snows will
he pace.
About to plough the waves, he will not reproach the stormy East winds;
nor will he watch for Constellations favourable for scudding over the
waves. Who, except either the soldier or the lover, will submit to both
the chill of the night, and the snows mingled with the heavy showers?
The one is sent as a spy against the hostile foe; the other keeps
his eye on his rival, as though upon an enemy. The one lays siege to
stubborn cities, the other to the threshold of his obdurate mistress:
answered to attack the enemy when buried in sleep; and to slaughter an
unarmed multitude with armed hand. Thus did the fierce troops of the
Full oft do lovers take advantage of the sleep of husbands, and brandish
their arms against the slumbering foe. To escape the troops of the
sentinels, and the bands of the patrol, is the part _both_ of the
soldier, and of the lover always in misery. Mars is wayward, and Venus
is uncertain; both the conquered rise again, and those fall whom you
would say could never possibly be prostrate.
Whoever, then, has pronounced Love _mere_ slothfulness, let him cease
Achilles is inflamed by the captive Briseis. Trojans, while you may,
destroy the Argive resources. Hector used to go to battle _fresh_ from
the embraces of Andromache; and it was his wife who placed his helmet on
his head. The son of Atreus, the first of _all_ the chiefs, on beholding
the daughter of Priam, is said to have been smitten with the dishevelled
better known than his, in all the heavens.
charming fair gave a fillip to me, in my indolence; and _Love_ commanded
and waging the warfare by night. Let him who wishes not to become
slothful, fall in love.
_He tells his mistress that she ought not to require presents as a
return for her love._
ships, was the cause of warfare to her two husbands; such as Leda was,
whom her crafty paramour, concealed in his white feathers, deceived
wander in the parched _fields of_ Argos, when the urn was pressing the
locks on the top of her head; such were you; and I was in dread of both
the eagle and the bull with respect to you, and whatever _form besides_
Love has created of the mighty Jove.
Now, all fears are gone, and the disease of my mind is cured; and now no
longer does that form _of yours_ rivet my eyes. Do you inquire why I
am changed? _It is_, because you require presents. This reason does not
allow of your pleasing me. So long as you were disinterested, I was in
love with your mind together with your person; now, _in my estimation_
your appearance is affected by this blemish on your disposition. Love is
both a child and naked; he has years without sordidness, and _he wears_
no clothes, that he may be without concealment. Why do you require the
son of Venus to be prostituted at a price? He has no fold in his dress,
arms, nor yet the son of Venus; it befits not such unwarlike Divinities
to serve for pay. The courtesan stands for hire to any one at a certain
price; and with her submissive body, she seeks for wretched pelf. Still,
Take, as an example, the cattle, devoid of reason; it were a shocking
thing for there to be a finer feeling in the brutes. The mare asks no
gift of the horse, nor the cow of the bull; the ram does not woo the
ewe, induced by presents. Woman alone takes pleasure in spoils torn
from the man; she alone lets out her nights; alone is she on sale, to be
hired at a price. She sells, too, _joys_ that delight them both, _and_
which both covet; and she makes it a _matter_ of pay, at what price she
herself is to be gratified. Those joys, which are so equally sweet to
both, why does the one sell, and _why_ the other buy them? Why must that
delight prove a loss to me, to you a gain, for which the female and the
disgracefully open _for the bribe_.
'Tis a dishonourable thing to defend the wretched criminals with a
make great acquisitions. 'Tis a disgrace for a woman to increase
her patrimonial possessions by the profits of her embraces, and to
prostitute her beauty for lucre. Thanks are _justly_ due for things
obtained without purchase; there are no thanks for an intercourse
price _once_ paid, he no longer remains a debtor for your acquiescence.
Cease, ye beauties, to bargain for pay for your favours. Sordid gains
bring no good results. It was not worth her while to bargain for the
the punishment.
But yet it is not unbecoming for a present to be asked of the wealthy
man; he has something to give to her who does ask for a present. Pluck
the grapes that hang from the loaded vines; let the fruitful soil of
and fidelity; what each one possesses, let him bestow it all upon his
mistress. My endowments, too, are in my lines to shig the praises of
those fair who deserve them; she, whom I choose, becomes celebrated
through my skill. Vestments will rend, gems and gold will spoil; the
fame which poesy confers is everlasting.
_Still_ I do not detest giving and revolt at it, but at being asked for
a price. Cease to demand it, _and_ I will give you that which I refuse
you while you ask.
_He begs Nape to deliver his letter to her mistress, and commences by
praising her neatness and dexterity, and the interest she has hitherto
manifested in his behalf._
female slaves; _known_, too, _by experience_ to be successful in the
contrivances of the stealthy night, and clever in giving the signals;
me; who have been found so often faithful by me in my difficulties; take
to your mistress; and by your diligence dispel _all_ impeding delay.
Neither veins of flint, nor hard iron is in your breast, nor have you a
simplicity greater than that of your _clever_ class. There is no doubt
that you, too, have experienced the bow of Cupid; in my behalf defend
the banner of your service. If _Corinna_ asks what I am doing, you will
say that I am living in expectation of the night. The wax inscribed with
my persuasive hand is carrying the rest.
While I am speaking, time is flying; opportunely give her my tablets,
when she is at leisure; but still, make her read them at once. I bid you
watch her eyes and her forehead as she reads; from the silent features
we may know the future. And _be there_ no delay; when she has read them
bleached wax is empty, with a margin on every side. Let her write the
lines close as they run, and let the letters traced in the extreme
margin long detain my eyes.
_But_ what need is there for wearying her fingers with holding the pen?
I should not delay to crown my victorious tablets with laurel, nor to
place them in the midst of the temple of Venus. Beneath them I would
inscribe "Naso consecrates these faithful servants of his to Venus; but
_He curses the tablets which he has sent, because his mistress has
written an answer on them, in which she refuses to grant his request._
|Lament my misfortune; my tablets have returned to me with sad
intelligence. Her unlucky letter announces that she cannot _be seen_
to-day. There is something in omens; just now, when she was preparing
threshold. When sent out of doors another time, remember to pass the
threshold more carefully, and _like_ a sober woman lift your foot high
_enough._
Away with you; obdurate tablets, fatal bits of board; and you wax, as
has sent you collected from the blossom of the tall hemlock, beneath its
abominable honey.
Besides, you were red, as though you had been thoroughly dyed in
board, thrown out in the street, _there_ may you lie; and may the weight
of the wheel crush you, as it passes along. I could even prove that he
who formed you to shape from the tree, had not the hands of innocence.
That tree surely has afforded a gibbet for some wretched neck, _and_ has
disgusting shelter to the screeching owls; in its branches it has borne
have I entrusted my courtship to these, and have I given soft words to
be _thus_ carried to my mistress?
_He entreats the morning not to hasten on with its usual speed._
|Now over the Ocean does she come from her aged husband _Tithonus_,
who, with her yellow locks, brings on the day with her frosty chariot.
Whither, Aurora, art thou hastening? Stay; _and_ then may the yearly
parent. Now do I delight to recline in the soft arms of my mistress;
now, if ever, is she deliciously united to my side. Now, too, slumbers
are sound, and now the moisture is cooling the birds, too, are sweetly
waronng with their little throats. Whither art thou hastening, hated by
the men, detested by the fair? Check thy dewy reins with thy rosy hand.
Before thy rising, the sailor better observes his Constellations; and
he wanders not in ignorance, in the midst of the waves. On thy approach,
the wayfarer arises, weary though he be; the soldier lays upon his arms
the hands used to bear them. Thou art the first to look upon the tillers
of the fields laden with the two-pronged fork; thou art the first to
summon the lagging oxen to the crooked yoke. 'Tis thou who dost deprive
of a single word.
counsel; for fresh combats each is forced to rise. Thou, when the
labours of the females might have had a pause, dost recal the hand of
the worker in wool to its task.
All _this_ I could endure; but who could allow the fair to arise _thus_
early, except _the man_ who has no mistress of his own? How often have
I wished that night would not make way for thee; and that the stars when
put to flight would not fly from thy countenance. Many a time have I
wished that either the wind would break thy chariot to pieces, or that
thy steed would fall, overtaken by _some_ dense cloud. Remorseless one,
whither dost thou hasten? Inasmuch as thy son was black, such was the
passion for Cephalus? Or does she fancy that her escapade was not known?
I _only_ wish it was allowed Tithonus to tell of thee; there would not
be a more coarse tale in _all_ the heavens. While thou art avoiding him,
because he is chilled by length of years, thou dost rise early in the
morning from _the bed of_ the old man to thy odious chariot. But if thou
wast _only_ holding some Cephalus embraced in thy arms; _then_ wouldst
thou be crying out, "Run slowly on, ye horses of the night."
Why should I be punished in my affections, if thy husband does decay
through _length of_ years? Wast thou married to the old fellow by my
youth beloved by _her_; and yet her beauty is not inferior to thine. The
parent of the Gods himself, that he might not see thee so often, joined
I had finished my reproaches; you might be sure she heard them; _for_
she blushed'. However, no later than usual did the day arise.
_His mistress having been in the habit of dyeing her hair with noxious
compositions, she has nearly lost it, becoming almost bald. He reminds
her of his former advice, and entreats her to abstain from the practice,
on which there may be a chance of her recovering it._
now you have no hair _left_, that you can be dyeing. But, if you had let
it alone, what was more plenteous than it? It used to reach down your
which the swarthy Seres use? Or _like_ the thread which the spider draws
out with her slender legs, when she fastens her light work beneath the
neglected beam? And yet its colour was not black, nor yet was it golden,
but though it was neither, it was a mixture of them both. A _colour_,
such as the tall cedar has in the moist vallies of craggy Ida, when its
bark is stript off.
Besides, it was _quite_ tractable, and falling into a thousand ringlets;
the tooth of the comb _ever_ tore it; your tire woman always had a whole
skin. Many a time was it dressed before my eyes; and _yet_, never did
morning, her locks not yet arranged, was she lying on the purple couch,
with her face half upturned. Then even, unadorned, was she beauteous; as
when the Thracian Bacchanal, in her weariness, throws herself carelessly
upon the green grass. Still, fine as it was, and just like down, what
evils, alas! did her tortured hair endure! How patiently did it submit
with their twisting circlets. "'Tis a shame," I used to cry, "'tis a
shame, to be burning that hair; naturally it is becoming; do, cruel one,
be merciful to your own head. Away with all violence from it; it is not
bodkins when applied."
Those beauteous locks are gone; which Apollo might have longed for,
_and_ which Bacchus might have wished to be on his own head. With them
held up with her dripping hand. Why are you complaining that hair so
with disconsolate hand? You are not seen to advantage by yourself with
eyes accustomed _to your former self._ For you to please, you ought to
be forgetful of your _former_ self.
treacherous hag has been washing you with Itæmonian water. The effects,
too, of no disease have injured you; (far away be all _bad_ omens;
own self who gave the prepared poison to your head. Now Germany will be
race you will be adorned. Ah! how many a time will you have to blush, as
any one admires your hair; and _then_ you will say, "Now I am receiving
praise for a bought commodity! In place of myself, he is now bepraising
when that glory was my own."
Wretch that I am! with difficulty does she restrain her tears; and she
covers her face with her hand, having her delicate cheeks suffused with
blushes. She is venturing to look at her former locks, _placed_ in her
Calm your feelings with your features; the loss may still be repaired.
Before long, you will become beauteous with your natural hair.
_He tells the envious that the fame of Poets is immortal, and that
theirs is not a life devoted to idleness._
|Why, gnawing Envy, dost thou blame me for years of slothfulness; and
_why_ dost thou call poesy the employment of an idle mind? _Thou sayest_
that I do not, after the manner of my ancestors, while vigorous years
allow me, seek the prizes of warfare covered with dust; that I do not
make myself acquainted with the prosy law, and that I have not let my
The pursuits of which thou art speaking, are perishable; by me,
everlasting fame is sought; that to all time I may be celebrated
time be sung throughout the whole world; although he is not powerful in
genius, in his skill he shows his might. No mischance will _ever_ come
father, the roguish procuress, and the cozening courtesan shall endure,
with his spirited language, have a name that will perish with no lapse
of time.
sailed_, and of the golden fleece sought by the chief, the son of Æson?
harvests, and the arms of Æneas, will be read of, so long as thou, Rome,
and the bow shall be the arms of Cupid, thy numbers, polished Tibullus,
known. Though flint-stones, then, _and_ though the share of the enduring
plough perish by lapse of time, _yet_ poetry is exempt from death.
Let monarchs and the triumphs of monarchs yield to poesy, and let the
Let the vulgar throng admire worthless things; let the yellow-haired
Apollo supply for me cups filled from the Castalian stream; let me bear,
too, on my locks the myrtle that dreads the cold; and let me often be
read by the anxious lover. Envy feeds upon the living; after death it is
at rest, when his own reward protects each according to his merit. Still
on; and a great portion of myself will _ever_ be surviving.
_He says that he is obliged by Cupid to write of Love instead of the
Wars, of the Giants, upon which subject he had already commenced._
have composed, the Poet of my own failings. This work, too, has Love
demanded. Afar hence, be afar hence, ye prudish matrons; you are not a
fitting audience for my wanton lines. Let the maiden that is not cold,
read me in the presence of her betrothed; the inexperienced boy, too,
wounded by a passion hitherto unknown; and may some youth, now wounded
by the bow by which I am, recognise the conscious symptoms of his flame;
and after long wondering, may he exclaim, "Taught by what informant, has
this Poet been composing my own story?"
I was (I remember) venturing to sing of the battles of the heavens,
expression; what time the Earth so disgracefully avenged herself, and
lofty Ossa, heaped upon Olympus, bore Pelion headlong downwards. Having
the clouds in my hands, and wielding the lightnings with Jove, which
with success he was to hurl in behalf of his realms of the heavens, my
mistress shut her door against me; the lightnings together with Jove did
I forsake. Jupiter himself disappeared from my thoughts. Pardon me, O
Jove; no aid did thy weapons afford me; the shut door was a more potent
thunderbolt than thine. I forthwith resumed the language of endearment
and trifling Elegies, those weapons of my own; and gentle words
prevailed upon the obdurate door.
recall the snow-white steeds of the Sun in his career. Through verses do
serpents burst, their jaws rent asunder, and the water turned back flows
upward to its source. Through verses have doors given way; and by verses
oak, overcome. Of what use is the swift Achilles celebrated by me? What
can this or that son of Atreus do for me? He, too, who wasted as many of
his years in wandering as in warfare? And the wretched Hector, dragged
by the Hæmonian steeds? But the charms of the beauteous fair being
ofttimes sung, she presents herself to the Poet as the reward of his
verse. This great recompense is given; farewell, then, ye illustrious
names of heroes; your favour is of no use to me. Ye charming fair, turn
your eyes to my lines, which blushing Cupid dictates to me.
_He has seen a lady walking in the portico of the temple of Apollo, and
has sent to know if he may wait upon her. She has replied that it is
quite impossible, as the eunuch Bagous is set to watch her. Ovid here
addresses Bagous, and endeavours to persuade him to relax his watch over
the fair; and shows him how he can do so with safety._
give me your attention, while I say a few but suitable words to you.
Yesterday morning I saw a young lady walking in that portico which
pleased me, I sent _to her_, and in my letter I proffered my request;
with trembling hand, she answered me, "I cannot." And to my inquiry, why
she could not, the cause was announced; _namely_, that your surveillance
over your mistress is too strict.
O keeper, if you are wise (believe me _now_), cease to deserve my
hatred; every one wishes him gone, of whom he stands in dread. Her
husband, too, is not in his senses; for who would toil at taking care of
that of which no part is lost, even if you do not watch it? But _still_,
in his madness, let him indulge his passion; and let him believe that
the object is chaste which pleases universally. By your favour, liberty
may by stealth be given to her; that _one day_ she may return to you
what you have given her. Are you ready to be a confidant; the mistress
is obedient to the slave. You fear to be an accomplice; you may shut
your eyes. Does she read a letter by herself; suppose her mother to have
an _old_ acquaintance. Should she go to visit a sick female friend, who
is not sick; in your opinion, let her be unwell. If she shall be a long
your head on your breast, you can snore away. And don't be enquiring
do you stand in any fear _whatever_ of the curving theatres.
An accomplice in the escapade will receive everlasting honour; and what
is less trouble than _merely_ to hold your tongue? He is in favour; he
stripes; he is omnipotent; the rest, a scrubby lot, are grovelling on.
By him, that the real circumstances may be concealed, false ones are
mistress_, Approves of. When the husband has quite contracted his brow,
and has pursed up his wrinkles, the caressing fair makes him become just
as she pleases. But still, let her sometimes contrive some fault against
Do you, on the other hand, making some charge which she may easily
explain; by a feigned accusation remove all suspicion of the truth.
man.
loathsome gaol receives the hearts that are unworthy of belief. In the
midst of water Tantalus is in want of water, and catches at the apples
dies before his time; she becomes a Goddess.
I have seen him wearing fetters on his bruised legs, through whom a
husband was obliged to know of an intrigue. The punishment was less than
his deserts; an unruly tongue was the injury of the two; the husband
was grieved; the female suffered the loss of her character. Believe me;
accusations are pleasing to no husband, and no one do they delight,
even though he should listen to them. If he is indifferent, then you are
wasting your information upon ears that care nothing for it; if he dotes
_on her_, by your officiousness is he made wretched.
Besides, a faux pas, although discovered, is not so easily proved; she
comes _before him_, protected by the prejudices of her judge. Should
even he himself see it, still he himself will believe her as she denies
it; and he will condemn his own eyesight, and will impose upon himself.
Let him _but_ see the tears of his spouse, and he himself will weep, and
he will say, "That blabbing fellow shall be punished." How unequal the
contest in which you embark! if conquered, stripes are ready for you;
_while_ she is reposing in the bosom of the judge.
No crime do we meditate; we meet not for mixing poisons; my hand is
not glittering with the drawn sword. We ask that through you we may be
enabled to love in safety; what can there be more harmless than these
our prayers?
_He again addresses Bagous, who has proved obdurate to his request, and
tries to effect his object by sympathising with his unhappy fate._
mistress, and that you cannot experience the mutual transports of love!
suffered those wounds which he made. You would be ready to accommodate,
and obliging to those who entreat you, had your own passion been before
inflamed by any fair. You were not born for _managing_ the steed, nor
_are you_ skilful in valorous arms; for your right hand the warlike
spear is not adapted. With these let males meddle; do you resign _all_
of your mistress.
Overwhelm her with your favours; her gratitude may be of use to you. If
you should miss that, what good fortune will there be for you? She has
both beauty, _and_ her years are fitted for dalliance; her charms are
not deserving to fade in listless neglect. Ever watchful though you are
deemed, _still_ she may deceive you; what two persons will, does not
fail of accomplishment. Still, as it is more convenient to try you
with our entreaties, we do implore you, while you have _still_ the
_He confesses that he is an universal admirer of the fair sex._
|I would not presume to defend my faulty morals, and to wield deceiving
arms in behalf of my frailties. I confess them, if there is any use
in confessing one's errors; and now, having confessed, I am foolishly
proceeding to my own accusation. I hate _this state_; nor, though I
wish, can I be otherwise than what I hate. Alas! how hard it is to bear
_a lot_ which you wish to lay aside! For strength and self-control fail
me for ruling myself; just like a ship carried along the rapid tide, am
I hurried away.
There is no single style of beauty which inflames my passion; there are
a hundred causes for me always to be in love.
Is there any fair one that casts down her modest eyes? I am on fire; and
that very modesty becomes an ambush against me. Is another one forward;
_then_ I am enchanted, because she is not coy; and her liveliness raises
all my expectations. If another seems to be prudish, and to imitate the
fair, you please me, _thus_ endowed with rare acquirements; or if
ignorant, you are charming for your simplicity. Is there one who says
that the lines of Callimachus are uncouth in comparison with mine; at
once she, to whom I am _so_ pleasing, pleases me. Is there even one who
abuses both myself, the Poet, and my lines; I could wish to have her who
so abuses me, upon my knee. Does this one walk leisurely, she enchants
me with her gait; is another uncouth, still, she may become more gentle,
on being more intimate with the other sex.
such extreme case, I could wish to steal a kiss from her as she sings.
Another is running through the complaining strings with active finger;
who could not fall in love with hands so skilled? _And now_, one
graceful sides with languishing art _in the dance_; to say nothing about
would become a Priapus. You, because you are so tall, equal the Heroines
lie. Another is active from her shortness; by both I am enchanted; both
tall and short suit my taste. Is one unadorned; it occurs what addition
there might be if she was adorned. Is one decked out; she sets out her
will charm me _too_; a Venus is pleasing, even of a swarthy colour. Does
black hair fall upon a neck of snow; Leda was sightly, with her raven
locks. Is the hair flaxen; with her saffron locks, Aurora was charming.
To every traditional story does my passion adapt itself. A youthful age
charms me; _an age_ more mature captivates me; the former is superior in
the charms of person, the latter excels in spirit.
In fine, whatever the fair any person approves of in all the City, to
all these does my passion aspire.
_He addresses his mistress, whom he has detected acting falsely towards
him._
|Away with thee, quivered Cupid: no passion is of a value so great, that
it should so often be my extreme wish to die. It is my wish to die,
as oft as I call to mind your guilt. Fair one, born, alas! to be a
that discover your doings; no presents stealthily sent reveal your
criminality. Oh! would that I might so accuse you, that, _after all_,
I could not convict you! Ah wretched me! _and_ why is my case so stare?
Happy _the man_ who boldly dares to defend the object which he loves;
to whom his mistress is able to say, "I have done nothing _wrong_."
Hard-hearted _is he_, and too much does he encourage his own grief, by
whom a blood-stained victory is sought in the conviction of the accused.
myself was witness of your criminality, when you thought I was asleep.
I saw you _both_ uttering many an expression by moving your eyebrows;
the words, too, preconcerted to stand for certain meanings. And now, the
tables removed, many a guest had gone away; a couple of youths _only_
were _there_ dead drunk. But then I saw you _both_ giving wanton kisses;
I am sure that there was billing enough on your part; such, _in fact_,
as no sister gives to a brother of correct conduct, but _rather such_
as some voluptuous mistress gives to the eager lover; such as we may
suppose that Phoebus did not give to Diana, but that Venus many a time
save to her own _dear_ Mars.
"What are you doing?" I cried out; "whither are you taking those
transports that belong to me? On what belongs to myself, I will lay the
me, _and_ with me and you; _but_ why does any third person take a share
in them?"
This did I say; and what, _besides_, sorrow prompted my tongue to say;
but the red blush of shame rose on her conscious features; just as the
sky, streaked by the wife of Tithonus, is tinted with red, or the
beauteous when mingled among their _encircling_ lilies; or when the
of time it may not turn yellow. That complexion _of hers_ was extremely
like to these, or to some one of these; and, as it happened, she never
was more beauteous _than then_. She looked towards the ground; to look
upon the ground, added a charm; sad were her features, in her sorrow was
she graceful. I had been tempted to tear her locks just as they were,
(and nicely dressed they were) and to make an attack upon her tender
cheeks.
When I looked on her face, my strong arms fell powerless; by arms of
her own was my mistress defended. I, who the moment before had been so
savage, _now_, as a suppliant and of my own accord, entreated that she
would give me kisses not inferior _to those given-to my rival_. She
smiled, and with heartiness she gave me her best _kisses_; such as might
have snatched his three-forked bolts from Jove. To my misery I am _now_
tormented, lest that other person received them in equal perfection; and
Those _kisses,_ too, were far better than those which I taught her; and
she seemed to have learned something new. That they were too delightful,
is a bad sign; that so lovingly were your lips joined to mine, _and_
mine to yours. And yet, it is not at this alone that I am grieved; I do
not only complain that kisses were given; although I do complain as well
that they were given; such could never have been taught but on a closer
acquaintanceship. I know not who is the master that has received a
remuneration so ample.
_He laments the death of the parrot which he had given to Corinna._
is dead; come in flocks to his obsequies, ye birds. Come, affectionate
denizens of air, and beat your breasts with your wings; and with your
hard claws disfigure your delicate features. Let your rough feathers be
let your songs resound.
Why, Philomela, are you complaining of the cruelty of _Tereus,_ the
Ismarian tyrant? _Surely,_ that grievance is worn out by its _length of_
years. Turn your attention to the sad end of a bird so prized. It is
is a great cause of sorrow, but, _still,_ that so old. All, who poise
yourselves in your career in the liquid air; but you, above the rest,
firm attachment between you, and your prolonged and lasting friendship
Orestes, the same, parrot, was the turtle-dove to you, so long as it was
allowed _by fate._
But what _matters_ that friendship? What the beauty of your rare
plumage? What your voice so ingenious at imitating sounds? What
avails it that _ever_ since you were given, you pleased my mistress?
Unfortunate pride of _all_ birds, you are indeed laid low. With your
feathers you could outvie the green emerald, having your purple beak
tinted with the ruddy saffron. There was no bird on earth more skilled
lisping notes.
Through envy, you were snatched away _from us_: you were the cause of
no cruel wars; you were a chatterer, and the lover of peaceful concord.
for that reason, they become old. With a very little you were satisfied;
and, through your love of talking, you could not give time to your mouth
for much food. A nut was your food, and poppies the cause of sleep; and
a drop of pure water used to dispel your thirst. The gluttonous vulture
lives on, the kite, too, that forms its circles in the air, and the
human voice, sent as a gift from the ends of the earth. What is best,
is generally first carried off by greedy hands; what is worthless, fills
death of him from Phylax; and now Hector became ashes, while his
brothers _yet_ lived.
Why should I mention the affectionate prayers of my anxious mistress in
your behalf; prayers borne over the seas by the stormy North wind? The
stood your Destiny, with her distaff all uncovered. And yet your words
did not die away, in your faltering mouth; as you died, your tongue
oaks, and the earth, moist with never-dying grass, is green. If there
is any believing in matters of doubt, that is said to be the abode of
innocent birds, from which obscene ones are expelled. There range far
and wide the guiltless swans; the long-lived Phoenix, too, ever the sole
bird _of its kind. There_ the bird itself of Juno unfolds her feathers;
the gentle dove gives kisses to its loving mate. Received in this home
in the groves, amid these the Parrot attracts the guileless birds by his
A sepulchre covers his bones; a sepulchre small as his body; on which a
little stone has _this_ inscription, well suited to itself: "From this
I had a tongue more skilled at talking than other birds."
_He attempts to convince his mistress, who suspects the contrary, that
he is not in love with her handmaid Cypassis._
charges? Though I should conquer, _yet_ I am tired of entering the
combat so oft. Do I look up to the _very_ top of the marble theatre,
from the multitude, you choose some woman, from whom to receive a cause
of grief. Or does some beauteous fair look on me with inexpressive
features; you find out that there are secret signs on the features. Do
I praise any one; with your nails you attack her ill-starred locks; if
I blame any one, you think I am hiding some fault. If my colour is
healthy, _then I am pronounced_ to be indifferent towards you; if
unhealthy, _then_ I am said to be dying with love for another. But
I _only_ wish I was conscious to myself of some fault; those endure
punishment with equanimity, who are deserving of it. Now you accuse
me without cause; and by believing every thing at random, you yourself
forbid your anger to be of any consequence. See how the long-eared ass,
over with everlasting blows.
blamed for having been the supplanter of her mistress. May the Gods
prove more favourable, than that if I should have any inclination for
a faux pas, a low-born mistress of a despised class should attract me!
What free man would wish to have amorous intercourse with a bondwoman,
is skilled in arranging your hair, and is a valuable servant to you for
the skill of her hands. And would I, forsooth, ask _such a thing_ of a
servant, who is so faithful to you? _And_ for why? Only that a refusal
might be united to a betrayal? I swear by Venus, and by the bow of the
winged boy, that I am accused of a crime which I never committed.
_He wonders how Corinna has discovered his intrigue with Cypassis, her
handmaid, and tells the latter how ably he has defended her and himself
to her mistress._
|Cypassis, perfect in arranging the hair in a thousand fashions, but
deserving to adorn the Goddesses alone; discovered, too, by me, in our
delightful intrigue, to be no novice; useful, indeed, to your mistress,
but still more serviceable to myself; who, _I wonder_, was the informant
of our stolen caresses? "Whence was Corinna made acquainted with your
escapade? Is it that I have blushed? Is it that, making a slip in any
expression, I have given any guilty sign of our stealthy amours? And
have I _not_, too, declared that if any one can commit the sin with a
bondwoman, that man must want a sound mind?
The Thessalian was inflamed by the beauty of the captive daughter of
Brises; the slave priestess of Phoebus was beloved by the general from
Mycenæ. I am not greater than the descendant of Tantalus, nor greater
than Achilles; why should I deem that a disgrace to me, which was
becoming for monarchs?
But when she fixed her angry eyes upon you, I saw you blushing all
over your cheeks. But, if, perchance, you remember, with how much more
presence of mind did I myself make oath by the great Godhead of Venus!
Do thou, Goddess, do thou order the warm South winds to bear away over
your company to-day. Why refuse me, ungrateful one, and why invent new
apprehensions? 'Tis enough to have laid one of your superiors under an
obligation. But if, in your folly, you refuse me, as the informer, I
will tell what has taken place before; and I myself will be the betrayer
of my own failing. And I will tell Cypassis, in what spots I have met
you, and how often, and in ways how many and what.
_To Cupid._
O Cupid, never angered enough against me, O boy, that hast taken up thy
abode in my heart! why dost thou torment me, who, _thy_ soldier, have
never deserted thy standards? And _why_, in my own camp, am I _thus_
wounded? Why does thy torch burn, thy bow pierce, thy friends? 'Twere a
greater glory to conquer those who war _with thee_. Nay more, did not
the Hæmonian hero, afterwards, relieve him, when wounded, with his
_the prey_ that flies, that which is caught he leaves behind; and he is
ever on the search for still more than he has found. We, a multitude
devoted to thee, are _too well_ acquainted with thy arms; _yet_ thy
tardy hand slackens against the foe that resists. Of what use is it to
be blunting thy barbed darts against bare bones? _for_ Love has left my
bones _quite_ bare. Many a man is there free from Love, many a damsel,
too, free from Love; from these, with great glory, may a triumph be
obtained by thee.
Rome, had she not displayed her strength over the boundless earth,
would, even to this day, have been planted thick with cottages of
into the pastures; the lengthened docks conceal the ship laid up; and
time for me, too, who have served so oft in love for the fair, now
discharged, to be living in quiet.
_And yet_, if any Divinity were to say to me, 'Live on, resigning love
I should decline it; so sweet an evil are the fair. When I am quite
exhausted, and the passion has faded from my mind, I know not by what
perturbation of my wretched feelings I am bewildered. Just as the horse
that is hard of mouth bears his master headlong, as he vainly pulls in
the reins covered with foam; just as a sudden gale, the land now nearly
made, carries out to sea the vessel, as she is entering harbour; so,
many a time, does the uncertain gale of Cupid bear me away, and rosy
Love resumes his well-known weapons. Pierce me, boy; naked am I exposed
to thee, my arms laid aside; hither let thy strength be _directed_:
here thy right hand tells _with effect_. Here, as though bidden, do thy
arrows now spontaneously come; in comparison to myself, their own quiver
is hardly so well known to them.
Wretched is he who endures to rest the whole night, and who calls
slumber a great good. Fool, what is slumber but the image of cold death?
The Fates will give abundance of time for taking rest.
Only let the words of my deceiving mistress beguile me; in hoping,
at least, great joys shall I experience. And sometimes let her use
caresses; sometimes let her find fault; oft may I enjoy _the favour_ of
my mistress; often may I be repulsed. That Mars is one so dubious,
is through thee, his step-son, Cupid; and after thy example does thy
step-father wield his arms. Thou art fickle, and much more wavering
than thy own wings; and thou both dost give and refuse thy joys at thy
uncertain caprice. Still if thou dost listen to me, as I entreat thee,
with thy beauteous mother; hold a sway never to be relinquished in my
heart. May the damsels, a throng too flighty _by far_, be added to thy
realms; then by two peoples wilt thou be revered.
_He tells Græcinus how he is in love with two mistresses at the same
time._
thou, I am sure, that a person cannot be in love with two females at the
same time. Through thee have I been deceived; through thee have I been
the same moment. Both of them are charming; both most attentive to their
dress; in skill, 'tis a matter of doubt, whether the one or the other is
superior. That one is more beauteous than this; this one, too, is more
beauteous than that; and this one pleases me the most, and that one the
impelled by the discordant breezes, and keep me distracted. Why,
Erycina, dost thou everlastingly double my pangs? Was not one damsel
sufficient for my anxiety? Why add leaves to the trees, why stars to the
heavens filled _with them?_ Why additional waters to the vast ocean?
But still this is better, than if I were languishing without a flame;
may a life of seriousness be the lot of my foes. May it be the lot of
my foes to sleep in the couch of solitude, and to recline their limbs
outstretched in the midst of the bed. But, for me, may cruel Love _ever_
disturb my sluggish slumbers; and may I be not the solitary burden of
my couch. May my mistress, with no one to hinder it, make me die _with
love_, if one is enough to be able to do so; _but_ if one is not enough,
suffice; flesh it is, not sinew that my body is in want of. Delight,
too, will give resources for vigour to my sides; through me has no fair
ever been deceived. Often, robust through the hours of delicious night,
have I proved of stalwart body, even in the mom. Happy the man, who
proves the delights of Love? Oh that the Gods would grant that to be the
cause of my end!
with his blood let him purchase eternal fame. Let the greedy man seek
wealth; and with forsworn mouth, let the shipwrecked man drink of the
seas which he has wearied with ploughing them. But may it be my lot to
perish in the service of Love: _and_, when I die, may I depart in the
funeral rites: "Such was a fitting death for his life."
_He endeavours to dissuade Corinna from her voyage to Baiæ._
|The pine, cut on the heights of Pelion, was the first to teach the
voyage full of danger, as the waves of the ocean wondered: which, boldly
yellow fleece. Oh! would that, overwhelmed, the Argo had drunk of the
fatal waves, so that no one might plough the wide main with the oar.
Lo! Corinna flies from both the well-known couch, and the Penates of
her home, and prepares to go upon the deceitful paths _of the ocean_.
Ah wretched me! why, for you, must I dread the Zephyrs, and the Eastern
gales, and the cold Boreas, and the warm wind of the South? There no
cities will you admire, _there_ no groves; _ever_ the same is the azure
appearance of the perfidious main.
should be pressed with your marble feet. Thus far is it safe; the rest
of _that_ path is full of hazard. And let others tell you of the warfare
of the winds: the waves which Scylla infests, or those which Charybdis
_haunts_: from what rocky range the deadly Ceraunia projects: in what
others tell: but do you believe what each of them relates: no storm
injures the person who credits them.
After a length of time _only_ is the land beheld once more, when, the
cable loosened, the curving ship runs out upon the boundless main: where
the anxious sailor dreads the stormy winds, and _sees_ death as near
him, as he sees the waves. What if Triton arouses the agitated waves?
How parts the colour, then, from all your face! Then you may invoke the
her own _dry_ land receives!'Tis far more safe to lie snug in the couch,
Thracian lyre.
But if the headlong gales bear away my unavailing words, still may
Galatea be propitious to your ship. The loss of such a damsel, both ye
Goddesses, daughters of Nereus, and thou, father of the Nereids, would
be a reproach to you. Go, mindful of me, on your way, _soon_ to return
with favouring breezes: may that, a stronger gale, fill your sails.
Then may the mighty Nereus roll the ocean towards this shore: in this
direction may the breezes blow: hither may the tide impel the waves. Do
you yourself entreat, that the Zephyrs may come full upon your canvass:
do you let out the swelling sails with your own hand.
I shall be the first, from the shore, to see the well-known ship, and
receive you in my arms, and will ravish, indiscriminately, many a kiss;
the victim, promised for your return, shall fall; the soft sand shall
be heaped, too, in the form of a couch; and some sand-heap shall be as a
many a story, how your bark was nearly overwhelmed in the midst of the
waves: and how, while you were hastening to me, you dreaded neither the
hours of the dangerous night, nor yet the stormy Southern gales. Though
I not myself encourage what is my own wish? May Lucifer, the most
brilliant in the lofty skies, speedily bring me that day, spurring on
his steed."
_He rejoices in the possession of his mistress, having triumphed over
every obstacle._
|Come, triumphant laurels, around my temples; I am victorious: lo! in my
bosom Corinna is; she, whom her husband, whom a keeper, whom a door _so_
strong, (so many foes!) were watching, that she might by no stratagem
be taken. This victory is deserving of an especial triumph: in which the
prize, such as it is, is _gained_ without bloodshed. Not lowly walls,
not towns surrounded with diminutive trenches, but a _fair_ damsel has
been taken by my contrivance.
so many, how great was the share of renown for the son of Atreus? But
my glory is undivided, and shared in by no soldier: and no other has
the credit of the exploit. Myself the general, myself the troops, I have
attained this end of my desires: I, myself, have been the cavalry, I
the infantry, I, the standard-bearer _too_. Fortune, too, has mingled
no hazard with my feats. Come hither, _then_, thou Triumph, gained by
exertions _entirely_ my own.
of Tyndarus been carried off, there would have been peace between Europe
and Asia. A female disgracefully set the wild Lapithæ and the two-formed
Latinus, forced the Trojans to engage in ruthless warfare, in thy
that sent against the Romans their fathers-in-law, and gave them cruel
arms. I have beheld the bulls fighting for a snow-white mate: the
heifer, herself the spectator, afforded fresh courage. Me, too, with
many others, but still without bloodshed, has Cupid ordered to bear the
standard in his service.
_He entreats the aid of Isis and Lucina in behalf of Corinna, in her
labour._
|While Corinna, in her imprudence, is trying to disengage the burden of
her pregnant womb, exhausted, she lies prostrate in danger of her life.
She, in truth, who incurred so great a risk unknown to me, is worthy
of my wrath; but anger falls before apprehension. But yet, by me it was
that she conceived; or so I think. That is often as a fact to me, which
is possible.
thou be giving life, she to me. Full many a time in thy honour has she
Thou, too, who dost have compassion on the females who are in labour,
whose latent burden distends their bodies slowly moving; come,
thee to command to become indebted to thee. I, myself, in white array,
will offer frankincense at thy smoking altars; I, myself, will
offer before thy feet the gifts that I have vowed. I will add _this_
inscription too; "Naso, for the preservation of Corinna, _offers
these_." But if, amid apprehensions so great, I may be allowed to give
you advice, let it suffice for you, Corinna, to have struggled in this
_one_ combat.
_He reproaches his mistress for having attempted to procure abortion._
|Of what use is it for damsels to live at ease, exempt from war, and
bloodstained troops; if, without warfare, they endure wounds from
weapons of their own, and arm their imprudent hands for their own
destruction? She who was the first to teach how to destroy the tender
embryo, was deserving to perish by those arms of her own. That the
stomach, forsooth, may be without the reproach of wrinkles, the sand
If the same custom had pleased the matrons of old, through _such_
criminality mankind would have perished; and he would be required, who
the original of our kind. Who would have destroyed the resources
of Priam, if Thetis, the Goddess of the waves, had refused to bear
swelling womb, the founder of the all-ruling City would have perished.
If Venus had laid violent hands on Æneas in her pregnant womb, the earth
would have been destitute of _its_ Cæsars. You, too, beauteous one,
might have died at the moment you might have been born, if your mother
had tried the same experiment which you have done. I, myself, though
destined as I am, to die a more pleasing death by love, should have
beheld no days, had my mother slain me.
Why do you deprive the loaded vine of its growing grapes? And why pluck
the sour apples with relentless hand? When ripe, let them fall of their
own accord; _once_ put forth, let them grow. Life is no slight reward
instruments, and _why_ give dreadful poisons to the _yet_ unborn? People
blame the Colchian damsel, stained with the blood of her sons; and they
grieve for Itys, Slaughtered by his own mother. Each mother was cruel;
but each, for sad reasons, took vengeance on her husband, by shedding
their common blood. Tell me what Tereus, or what Jason excites you to
pierce your body with an anxious hand?
lioness dare to destroy an offspring of her own. But, delicate females
herself, who kills her _offspring_ in the womb. She dies herself, and,
with her loosened hair, is borne upon the bier; and those whoever only
vanish in the air of the heavens, and may there be no weight in _these_
presages of mine. Ye forgiving Deities, allow her this once to do wrong
with safety _to herself_; that is enough; let a second transgression
bring _its own_ punishment.
_He addresses a ring which he has presented to his mistress, and envi
its happy lot._
which there is nothing of value but the affection of the giver; go as a
pleasing gift; _and_ receiving you with joyous feelings, may she at once
place you upon her finger. May you serve her as well as she is constant
to me; and nicely fitting, may you embrace her finger in your easy
circle. Happy ring, by my mistress will you be handled. To my sorrow, I
am now envying my own presents.
O! that I could suddenly be changed into my own present, by the arts of
to touch the bosom of my mistress, and for her to place her left hand
within her dress. Though light and fitting well, I would escape from
her finger; and loosened by _some_ wondrous contrivance, into her bosom
secret tablets, and that the seal, neither sticky nor dry, might not
fair. Only I would not seal a note, the cause of grief to myself. Should
sticking fast to your fingers with ray contracted circle.
To you, my life, I would never be a cause of disgrace, or a burden
which your delicate fingers would refuse to carry. Wear me, when you
are bathing your limbs in the tepid stream; and put up with the
inconvenience of the water getting beneath the stone. But, I doubt, that
_on seeing you_ naked, my passion would be aroused; and that, a ring, I
should enact the part of the lover. _But_ why wish for impossibilities?
Go, my little gift; let her understand that my constancy is proffered
with you.
_He enlarges on the beauties of his native place, where he is now
staying; but, notwithstanding the delights of the country, he says that
he cannot feel happy in the absence of his mistress, whom he invites to
visit him._
me; a little spot, but salubrious with its flowing streams. Though the
Sun should cleave the earth with his approaching rays, and though the
Pelignian fields are traversed by flowing streams, and the shooting
grass is verdant on the soft ground. The earth is fertile in corn, and
shooting blades, the grassy turfs cover the moistened ground.
But my flame is far away. In one word, I am mistaken; she who excites
my flame is far off; my flame is here. I would not choose, could I be
placed between Pollux and Castor, to be in a portion of the heavens
without yourself. Let them lie with their anxious cares, and let them
be pressed with the heavy weight of the earth, who have measured out
the fair to go as the companions of the youths, if the earth must be
measured out into lengthened tracks. Then, had I, shivering, had to pace
had been_ with my love. With my love, I could venture to rush through
the Libyan quicksands, and to spread my sails to be borne along by the
fitful Southern gales. _Then_, I would not dread the monsters which bark
beneath the thigh of the virgin _Scylla_; nor winding Malea, thy bays;
nor where Charybdis, sated with ships swallowed up, disgorges them, and
sucks up again the water which she has discharged. And if the sway of
the winds prevails, and the waves bear away the Deities about to come
to our aid; do you throw your snow-white arms around my shoulders; with
active body will I support the beauteous burden. The youth who visited
Hero, had often swam across the waves; then, too, would he have crossed
them, but the way was dark.
But without you, although the fields affording employment with their
vines detain me; although the meadows be overflowed by the streams, and
and the cool air refresh the foliage of the trees, I should not seem
to be among the healthy Peliguians; I _should_ not _seem to be in_ the
place of my birth--my paternal fields; but in Scythia, and among the
rocks which are red with the gore of Prometheus.
I _so_ often torn away from my love? But you used to swear, _both_ by
myself, and by your eyes, my stars, that you would ever be my companion.
The winds and the waves carry away, whither they choose, the empty words
of the fair, more worthless than the falling leaves. Still, if there is
any affectionate regard in you for me _thus_ deserted: _now_ commence
at full speed. But you, rugged hills, subside, wherever she shall come;
and you paths in the winding vales, be smooth.
_He says that he is the slave of Corinna, and complains of the tyranny
which she exercises over him._
|If there shall be any one who thinks it inglorious to serve a damsel:
in his opinion I shall be convicted of such baseness. Let me be
disgraced; if only she, who possesses Paphos, and Cythera, beaten by
the waves, torments me with less violence. And would that I had been the
prize, too, of some indulgent mistress; since I was destined to be the
prize of some fair. Beauty begets pride; through her charms Corinna is
disdainful. Ah wretched me! why is she so well known to herself? Pride,
forsooth, is caught from the reflection of the mirror: and _there_ she
sees not herself, unless she is first adorned.
If your beauty gives you a sway not too great over all things, face born
to fascinate my eyes, still, you ought not, on that account, to despise
me comparatively with yourself. That which is inferior must be united
with what is great. The Nymph Calypso, seized with passion for a mortal,
is believed to have detained the hero against his will. It is believed
that the ocean-daughter of Nereus was united to the king of Plithia,
same kind of verse is unequal; but still the heroic is becomingly united
You, too, my life, receive me upon any terms. May it become you to
impose conditions in the midst of your caresses. I will be no disgrace
to you, nor one for you to rejoice at my removal. This affection will
in place of great wealth: even many a fair wishes to gain fame through
she not be ready to give to be so? But neither do the cool Eurotas, and
the poplar-bearing Padus, far asunder, roll along the same banks; nor
shall any one but yourself be celebrated in my poems. You, alone, shall
afford subject-matter for my genius.
_He tells Macer that he ought to write on Love._
and art giving their first arms to the heroes, after taking the oaths;
tender Love attacks me, when about to attempt a mighty subject. Many
a time have I said to my mistress, "At length, away with you:" _and_
forthwith she has seated herself in my lap. Many a time have I said, "I
am ashamed _of myself:" when,_ with difficulty, her tears repressed, she
has said, "Ah wretched me! Now you are ashamed to love." And _then_ she
has thrown her arms around my neck: and has given me a thousand kisses,
which _quite_ overpowered me. I am overcome: and my genius is called
away from the arms it has assumed; and I _forthwith_ sing the exploits
of my home, and my own warfare.
Still did I wield the sceptre: and by my care my Tragedy grew apace;
tragic pall, and my coloured buskins, and the sceptre wielded so well
by a private hand. From this pursuit, too, did the influence of my
cruel mistress draw me away, and Love triumphed over the Poet with his
buskins. As I am allowed _to do_, either I teach the art of tender love,
(alas! by my own precepts am I myself tormented:) or I write what was
delivered to Ulysses in the words of Penelope, or thy tears, deserted
Phyllis. What, _too_, Paris and Macareus, and the ungrateful Jason, and
the parent of Hip-polytus, and Hippolytus _himself_ read: and what the
wretched Dido says, brandishing the drawn sword, and what the Lesbian
mistress of the Æolian lyre.
Penelope recognized the seal of Ulysses: the stepmother read what was
written by her own Hippolytus. Then did the dutiful Æneas write an
answer to the afflicted Elissa; and Phyllis, if she only survives, has
something to read. The sad letter came to Hypsipyle from Jason: the
Lesbian damsel, beloved _by Apollo_, may give the lyre that she has
who sings of wars, is beauteous Love unsung of by thee, in the midst of
warfare. Both Paris is there, and the adultress, the far-famed cause of
guilt: and Laodamia, who attends her husband in death. If well I know
thee; thou singest not of wars with greater pleasure than these; and
from thy own camp thou comest back to mine.
_He tells a husband who does not care for his wife to watch her a
little more carefully._
|If, fool, thou dost not need the fair to be well watched; still have
her watched for my sake: that I may be pleased with her the more. What
one may have is worthless; what one may not have, gives the more edge to
the desires. If a man falls in love with that which another permits him
_to love_, he is a man without feeling. Let us that love, both hope and
fear in equal degree; and let an occasional repulse make room for our
desires.
Why should I _think of_ Fortune, should she never care to deceive me? I
value nothing that does not sometimes cause me pain. The clever Corinna
saw this failing in me; and she cunningly found out the means by which
I might be enthralled. Oh, how many a time, feigning a pain in her head
foot, to take my departure! Oh, how many a time has she feigned a fault,
and guilty _herself,_ has made there to be an appearance of innocence,
just as she pleased! When thus she had tormented me and had rekindled
the languid flame, again was she kind and obliging to my wishes. What
caresses, what delightful words did she have ready for me! What kisses,
ye great Gods, and how many, used she to give me!
You, too, who have so lately ravished my eyes, often stand in dread of
treachery, often, when entreated, refuse; and let me, lying prostrate
on the threshold before your door-posts, endure the prolonged cold
throughout the frosty night. Thus is my love made lasting, and it grows
up in lengthened experience; this is for my advantage, this forms food
become a cause of weariness to me, just as sweet food cloys the
never been made a mother by Jove. While Juno is watching Io 'with her
curving horns, she becomes still more pleasing to Jove than she has been
_before_.
Whoever desires what he may have, and what is easily obtained, let him
pluck leaves from the trees, and take water from the ample stream. If
any damsel wishes long to hold her sway, let her play with her lover.
Alas! that I, myself, am tormented through my own advice. Let _constant_
indulgence be the lot of whom it may, it does injury to me: that which
pursues, _from it_ I fly; that which flies, I ever pursue. But do thou,
too sure of the beauteous fair, begin now at nightfall to close thy
house. Begin to enquire who it is that so often stealthily paces thy
the careful handmaid is carrying, or whence bringing back, the tablets?
Why so oft she lies in her couch apart? Let this anxiety sometimes gnaw
into thy very marrow; and give some scope and some opportunity for my
stratagems.
If one could fall in love with the wife of a fool, that man could rob
the barren sea-shore of its sand. And now I give thee notice; unless
thou begin to watch this fair, she shall begin to cease to be a flame
of mine. I have put up with much, and that for a long time; I have often
hoped that it would come to pass, that I should adroitly deceive thee,
when thou hadst watched her well. Thou art careless, and dost endure
what should be endured by no husband; but an end there shall be of an
amour that is allowed to me. And shall I then, to my sorrow, forsooth,
never be forbidden admission? Will it ever be night for me, with no
one for an avenger? Am I to dread nothing? Shall I heave no sighs in my
sleep? What have I to do with one so easy, what with such a pander of
a husband? By thy own faultiness thou dost mar my joys. Why, then, dost
thou not choose some one else, for so great long-suffering to please? If
it pleases thee for me to be thy rival, forbid me _to be so_.----
_The Poet deliberates whether he shall continue to write Elegies, or
whether he shall turn to Tragedy._
|There stands an ancient grove, and one uncut for many a year; 'tis
worthy of belief that a Deity inhabits that spot. In the midst there is
a holy spring, and a grotto arched with pumice; and on every side
the birds pour forth their sweet complaints. Here, as I was walking,
protected by the shade of the trees, I was considering upon what work my
Muse should commence. Elegy came up, having her perfumed hair wreathed;
and, if I mistake not, one of her feet was longer _than the other_.
garb that of one in love; the fault of her foot was one cause of her
gracefulness.
Ruthless Tragedy, too, came with her mighty stride; on her scowling brow
were her locks; her pall swept the ground. Her left hand held aloft the
And first she spoke; "And when will there be an end of thy loving? O
wanton course of life; the cross roads, as they divide in their many
ways, tell of it. Many a time does a person point with his finger at the
Poet as he goes along, and say, 'That, that is the man whom cruel Love
torments.' Thou art talked of as the story of the whole City, and
yet thou dost not perceive it; while, all shame laid aside, thou art
boasting of thy feats. 'Twere time to be influenced, touched by a more
greater task. By thy subject thou dost cramp thy genius; sing of the
exploits of heroes; then thou wilt say, 'This is the field that is
worthy of my genius.' Thy Muse has sportively indited what the charming
fair may sing; and thy early youth has been passed amidst its own
numbers. Now may I, Roman Tragedy, gain a celebrity by thy means; thy
conceptions will satisfy my requirements."
Thus far _did she speak_; and, supported on her tinted buskins, three or
four times she shook her head with its flowing locks. The other one,
if rightly I remember, smiled with eyes askance. Am I mistaken, or was
there a branch of myrtle in her right hand? "Why, haughty Tragedy," said
she, "dost thou attack me with high-sounding words? And canst thou never
be other than severe? Still, thou thyself hast deigned to be excited in
own verse. I should not compare heroic measures with my own; thy palaces
quite overwhelm my humble abodes. I am a trifler; and with myself,
Cupid, my care, is a trifler too; I am no more substantial myself than
is my subject-matter. Without myself, the mother of wanton Love were
confidant. The door which thou with thy rigid buskin canst not unlock,
the same is open to my caressing words. And yet I have deserved more
power than thou, by putting up with many a thing that would not have
been endured by thy haughtiness.
"Through me Corinna learned how, deceiving her keeper, to shake the
up at her obdurate doors, not fearing to be read by the people as they
passed! I remember besides, how, when sent, I have been concealed in the
bosom of the handmaid, until the strict keeper had taken his
departure. Still further--when thou didst send me as a present on her
water close by. I was the first to cause the prospering germs of thy
genius to shoot; it has, as my gift, that for which she is now asking
thee."
They had now ceased; on which I began: "By your own selves, I conjure
you both; let my words, as I tremble, be received by unprejudiced ears.
Thou, the one, dost grace me with the sceptre and the lofty buskin;
already, even by thy contact with my lips, have I spoken in mighty
accents. Thou, the other, dost offer a lasting fame to my loves; be
propitious, then, and with the long lines unite the short.
"Do, Tragedy, grant a little respite to the Poet. Thou art an everlasting
task; the time which she demands is but short." Moved by my entreaties,
she gave me leave; let tender Love be sketched with hurried hand,
presses on.
_To his mistress, in whose company he is present at the chariot races in
the Circus Maximus. He describes the race._
still I pray that he who is your favourite may win. I have come here to
yea cause may not be unknown to you. You are looking at the race, I _am
looking_ at you; let us each look at what pleases us, and so let us each
is, that is your favourite; it is then his lot to be the object of your
care; might such be my lot; with ardent zeal to be borne along would I
should be seen by me in my course, then I should stop; and the reins,
let go, would fall from my hands.
while, Hippodamia, he was gazing on thy face! Still did he prove the
victor through the favour of his charmer. Why do you shrink away in
right hand, whoever you are, be accommodating to the fair; she is
looking on behind us; draw in your legs, if you have _any_ decency, and
don't press her back with your hard knees. But your mantle, hanging too
low, is dragging on the ground; gather it up; or see, I am taking it
concealing ancles so pretty; and the more you gaze upon them, the more
disobliging garment you are. Such were the ancles of the fleet Atalanta,
the ancles of the swift Diana, when, herself _still_ bolder, she pursues
the bold beasts of prey. On not seeing them, I am on fire; what would be
the consequence if they _were seen?_ You are heaping flames upon
flames, water upon the sea. From them I suspect that the rest may prove
charming, which is so well hidden, concealed beneath the thin dress.
But, meanwhile, should you like to receive the gentle breeze which
rather that of my own passion, and not of the weather, and is the love
of the fair burning my inflamed breast? While I am talking, your white
clothes are sprinkled with the black dust; nasty dust, away from a body
like the snow.
in words and feelings. The time is come to applaud; the procession
passion of mine may prove victorious.
have nought to do with the sea; my own dry land engages me. Soldier,
found in the midst of Peace. Let Phoebus be propitious to the augurs,
Phoebe to the huntsmen; turn, Minerva, towards thyself the hands of the
propitious. Thee, genial Venus, and _the Loves_, the boys so potent
with the bow, do I salute; be propitious, Goddess, to my aspirations.
Inspire, too, kindly feelings in my new mistress; let her permit
herself to be loved." She has assented; and with her nod she has given
a favourable sign. What the Goddess has promised, I entreat yourself to
promise. With the leave of Venus I will say it, you shall be the greater
Goddess. By these many witnesses do I swear to you, and by this array
of the Gods, that for all time you have been sighed for by me. But
your legs have no support; you can, if perchance you like, rest the
of all. I see who is your favourite; whoever you wish well to, he will
prove the conqueror. The very horses appear to understand what it is you
wish for. Oh shocking! around the turning-place he goes with a circuit
with his wheel in contact. What, wretched man, art thou about? Thou art
wasting the good wishes of the fair; pull in the reins, I entreat, to
him back; but that the waving of the garments may not disarrange your
over the wide expanse; let my wishes, let those of my mistress, meet
with success. The wishes of my mistress are fulfilled; my wishes still
She smiles, and she gives me a promise of something with her expressive
eye. That is enough for this spot; grant the rest in another place.
_He complains of his mistress, whom he has found to be forsworn._
|Go to, believe that the Gods exist; she who had sworn has broken her
forsworn, flowing locks had she; after she has deceived the Gods, she
has them just as long. Before, she was pale, having her fair complexion
suffused with the blush of the rose; the blush is still beauteous on
her complexion of snow. Her foot was small; still most diminutive is the
size of that foot. Tall was she, and graceful; tall and graceful does
she still remain. Expressive eyes had she, which shone like stars; many
Even the Gods, forsooth, for ever permit the fair to be forsworn, and
Gods, if with impunity she has proved false to you, why have I suffered,
punishment for the deserts of another? But the virgin daughter of
die for her mother, so inopportunely beauteous. 'Tis not enough that I
had you for witnesses to no purpose; unpunished, she laughs at even the
Gods together with myself; that by my punishment she may atone for her
perjuries, am I, the deceived, to be the victim of the deceiver? Either
a Divinity is a name without reality, and he is revered in vain, and
influences people with a silly credulity; or else, _if there is any_
God, he is fond of the charming fair, and gives them alone too much
licence to be able to do any thing.
Against us Mavors is girded with the fatal sword; against us the lance
is directed by the invincible hand of Pallas; against us the flexible
bow of Apollo is bent; against us the lofty right hand of Jove wields
the lightnings. The offended Gods of heaven fear to hurt the fair; and
they spontaneously dread those who dread them not. And who, then, would
take care to place the frankincense in his devotion upon the altars? At
least, there ought to be more spirit in men. Jupiter, with his fires,
weapons, thus darted, to strike the perjured female. Many a one has
the flames; that punishment was found for her by her own compliant
disposition. But if she had betaken herself off, on the approach of her
lover, his father would not have had for Bacchus the duties of a mother
to perform.
Why do I complain, and why blame all the heavens? The Gods have eyes as
well as we; the Gods have hearts as well. Were I a Divinity myself,
I would allow a woman with impunity to swear falsely by my Godhead. I
myself would swear that the fair ever swear the truth; and I would not
be pronounced one of the morose Divinities. Still, do you, fair one,
use their favour with more moderation, or, at least, do have some regard
_He tells a jealous husband, who watches his wife, that the greater his
precautions, the greater are the temptations to sin._
|Cruel husband, by setting a guard over the charming fair, thou
dost avail nothing; by her own feelings must each be kept. If, all
apprehensions removed, any woman is chaste, she, in fact, is chaste; she
may have guarded the person, the mind is still unchaste; and, unless it
chooses, it cannot be constrained. You cannot confine the mind, should
you lock up every thing; when all is closed, the unchaste one will be
within. The one who can sin, errs less frequently; the very opportunity
makes the impulse to wantonness to be the less powerful. Be persuaded
by me, and leave off instigating to criminality by constraint; by
indulgence thou mayst restrain it much more effectually.
I have sometimes seen the horse, struggling against his reins, rush on
like lightning with his resisting mouth. Soon as ever he felt that rein
was given, he stopped, and the loosened bridle lay upon his flowing
mane. We are ever striving for what is forbidden, and are desiring what
is denied us; even so does the sick man hanker after the water that is
forbidden him. Argus used to carry a hundred eyes in his forehead, a
Danaë, who, a maid, had been placed in the chamber which was to last
although she was without a keeper, amid so many youthful suitors,
remained undefiled.
Whatever is hoarded up, we long for it the more, and the very pains
invite the thief; few care for what another giants.
Not through her beauty is she captivating, but through the fondness
of her husband; people suppose it to be something unusual which has so
captivated thee. Suppose she is not chaste whom her husband is guarding,
but faithless; she is beloved; but this apprehension itself causes
her value, rather than her beauty. Be indignant if thou dost please;
forbidden pleasures delight me: if any woman can only say, "I am
confine a free-born woman; let these fears harass the bodies of those
from foreign parts. That the keeper, forsooth, may be able to say, 'I
caused it she must be chaste for the credit of thy slave. He is too
much of a churl whom a faithless wife injures, and is not sufficiently
acquainted with the ways of the City; in which Romulus, the son of Ilia,
and Remus, the son of Ilia, both begotten by Mars, were not born without
a crime being committed. Why didst thou choose a beauty for thyself, if
any means be united.'"
If thou art wise, show indulgence to thy spouse, and lay aside thy
morose looks; and assert not the rights of a severe husband. Show
courtesy, too, to the friends thy wife shall find thee, and many a
one will she find. 'Tis thus that great credit accrues at a very small
outlay of labour. Thus wilt thou be able always to take part in the
which you have not presented to her.
_A vision, and its explanation._
|Twas night, and sleep weighed down my wearied eyes. Such a vision as
this terrified my mind.
Beneath a sunny hill, a grove was standing, thick set with holm oaks;
and in its branches lurked full many a bird. A level spot there was
beneath, most verdant with the grassy mead, moistened with the drops of
the gently trickling stream. Beneath the foliage of the trees, I was
seeking shelter from the heat; still, under the foliage of the trees it
was hot. Lo! seeking for the grass mingled with the variegated flowers,
a white cow was standing before my eyes; more white than the snows at
the moment when they have just fallen, which, time has not yet turned
into flowing water. More white than the milk which is white with its
bull there was, her companion, he, in his happiness, eas her mate; and
with his own one he pressed the tender grass. While he was lying, and
slowly ruminating upon the grass chewed once again; and once again was
feeding on the food eaten by him before; he seemed, as sleep took away
his strength, to lay his horned head upon the ground that supported
it. Hither came a crow, gliding through the air on light wings; and
chattering, took her seat upon the green sward; and thrice with her
annoying beak did she peck at the breast of the snow-white cow; and with
her bill she took away the white hair. Having remained awhile, she left
the spot and the bull; but black envy was in the breast of the cow.
And when she saw the bulls afar browsing upon the pastures (bulls
were browsing afar upon the verdant pastures), thither did she betake
herself, and she mingled among those herds, and sought out a spot of
more fertile grass.
"Come, tell me, whoever thou art, thou interpreter of the dreams of the
night, what (if it has any truth) this vision means." Thus said I: thus
spoke the interpreter of the dreams of the night, as he weighed in his
mind each particular that was seen; "The heat which thou didst wish to
avoid beneath the rustling leaves, but didst but poorly avoid, was that
of Love. The cow is thy mistress; that complexion is suited to the fair.
Thou wast the male, and the bull with the fitting mate. Inasmuch as the
crow pecked at her breast with her sharp beak; an old hag of a procuress
hesitating long, his heifer left the bull, thou wilt be left to be
chilled in a deserted couch. Envy and the black spots below the front of
her breast, show that she is not free from the reproach of inconstancy."
Thus spoke the interpreter; the blood retreated from my chilled face;
and profound night stood before my eyes.
_He addresses a river which has obstructed his passage while he is going
to his mistress._
mistress I am hastening; stay thy waters for a moment. No bridges hast
of the oar, by means of the rope thrown across. Thou wast a small
stream, I recollect; and I did not hesitate to pass across thee; and
the surface of thy waves then hardly reached to my ancles. Now, from the
thy turbid stream thou dost pour thy muddied waters. What avails it me
thus to have hastened? What to have given so little time to rest? What
If still I must be standing here; if, by no contrivance, thy opposite
banks are granted to be trodden by my foot.
possessed, when he bore away the head, thickset with the dreadful
Ceres first came, thrown upon the uncultivated ground. Of the wondrous
fictions of the ancient poets do I speak; no time has produced, nor does
produce, nor will produce these wonders. Rather, do thou, stream that
dost overflow thy wide banks, flow within thy limits, then for ever
mayst thou run on. Torrent, thou wilt not, believe me, be able to endure
the reproaches, if perchance I should be mentioned as detained by thee
in my love.
Rivers ought rather to aid youths in their loves; rivers themselves have
his cold fords. Not yet was Troy besieged for twice five years, when,
Xanthus, Neæra attracted thy eyes. Besides; did not enduring love for
They say, too, that thou, Peneus, didst conceal, in the lands of the
destined to be the parent of five daughters? Should I ask of Achelous,
"Where now are thy horns?" thou wouldst complain that they were broken
such value was Deianira alone. The enriching Nile, that flows through
so vast, is said not to have been able to overpower by his stream the
Salmoneus, bade his waters to depart; his waters, so ordered, did
depart.
Nor do I pass thee by, who as thou dost roll amid the hollow rocks,
captivated, although she was unsightly in her garb, bearing the marks of
her nails on her locks, the marks of her nails on her cheeks. Bewailing
both the crimes of her uncle, and the fault of Mars, she was wandering
along the solitary spots with naked feet. Her the impetuous stream
beheld from his rapid waves, and raised his hoarse mouth from the midst
of his fords, and thus he said: "Why, in sorrow, art thou pacing my
thy vestments? Why wandering thus alone? And why does no white fillet
wet with tears? And why beat thy open breast with frenzied hand? That
man has both flints and ore of iron in his breast, who, unconcerned,
beholds the tears on thy delicate face. Ilia, lay aside thy fears; my
palace shall be opened unto thee; the streams, too, shall obey thee;
Ilia, lay aside thy fears. Among a hundred Nymphs or more, thou shalt
hold the sway; for a hundred or more does my stream contain. Only,
descendant of Troy, despise me not, I pray; gifts more abundant than my
promises shalt thou receive."
_Thus_ he said; she casting on the ground her modest eyes, as she wept,
besprinkled her warm breast with her tears. Thrice did she attempt to
fly; thrice did she stop short at the deep waves, as fear deprived her
of the power of running. Still, at last, as with hostile fingers she
tore her hair, with quivering lips she uttered these bitter words; "Oh!
would that my bones had been gathered up, and hidden in the tomb of my
fathers, while yet they could be gathered, belonging to me a virgin! Why
driven from the altars of Ilium? Why do I hesitate? See! by the fingers
of the multitude am I pointed at as unchaste. Let this disgrace be
ended, which marks my features."
Thus far _did she speak_, and before her swollen eyes she extended her
waters. The flowing stream is said to have placed his hands beneath her
breast, and to have conferred on her the privilege of his nuptial couch.
'Tis worthy of belief, too, that thou hast been inflamed _with love_ for
some maiden; but the groves and woods conceal thy failings.
While I have been talking, it has become more swollen with its extending
waves, and the deep channel contains not the rushing waters. What,
furious torrent, hast thou against me? Why thus delay our mutual
transports? Why, churlish river, interrupt the journey once commenced?
some note? What if thy fame was mighty throughout the earth? But no name
hast thou collected from the exhausted rivulets; thou hast no springs,
no certain abode hast thou. In place of spring, thou hast rain and
melted snow; resources which the sluggish winter supplies to thee.
Either in muddy guise, in winter time, thou dost speed onward in thy
course; or filled with dust, thou dost pass over the parched ground.
What thirsty traveller has been able to drink of thee then? Who has
said, with grateful lips, "Mayst thou flow on for ever?"
injurious to the fields. Perhaps these _mischiefs may move_ others; my
own evils move me. And, oh shocking! did I in my madness relate to
this stream the loves of the rivers? I am ashamed unworthily to have
pronounced names so great. Gazing on I know not what, could I speak of
But for thy deserts, torrent far from clear, I wish that for thee there
may be scorching heat, and winter always dry.
```At non formosa est, at non bene culta puella;
````At, puto, non votis sæpe petita meis.
```Hanc tamen in nullos tenui male languidus usus,
````Sed jacui pigro crimen onusque toro.
```Nec potui cupiens, pariter cupiente puella,
````Inguinis effoeti parte juvante frui.
```Ilia quidem nostro subjecit ebumea collo
````Brachia, Sithonia candidiora nive;
```Osculaque inseruit cupidæ lactantia linguæ,
````Lascivum femori Supposuitque femur;
```Et mihi blanditias dixit, Dominumque vocavit,
````Et quæ præterea publica verba juvant.
```Tacta tamen veluti gelidâ mea membra cicutâ,
````Segnia propositum destituere suum.
```Truncus iners jacui, species, et inutile pondus:
````Nec satis exactum est, corpus an umbra forem,
```Quæ mihi ventura est, (siquidem ventura), senectus,
````Cum desit numeris ipsa juventa suis?
```Ah pudet annorum! quo me juvenemque virumque,
````Nec juvenem, nec me sensit arnica virum.
```Sic flammas aditura pias æterna sacerdos
````Surgit, et a caro fratre verenda soror.
```At nuper bis flava Chlide, ter Candida Pitho,
````Ter Libas officio continuata meo.
```Exigere a nobis angustâ nocte Corinnam,
````Me memini numéros sustinuisse uovem.
```Num mea Thessalico languent tlevota veneno Co
````rpora? num misero carmen et herba nocent?
```Sagave Puniceâ defixit nomina cerâ,
````Et medium tenues in jecur egit acus?
```Carmine læsa Ceres sterüem vanescit in herbam:
````Deficiunt læsæ carmine fontis aquæ:
```Ilicibus glandes, cantataque vitibus uva
````Decidit; et nullo poma movente fluunt.
```Quid vetat et nervos magicas torpere per arteg
````Forsitan impatiens sit latus inde meum.
```Hue pudor accessit: facti pudor ipse nocebat
````Ille fuit vitii causa secunda mei.
```At qualem vidi tantum tetigique puellam,
````Sic etiam tunicâ tangitur ipsa sua.
```Illius ad tactum Pylius juvenescere possit,
````Tithonusque annis fortior esse suis.=
```Hæc mihi contigerat; scd vir non contigit illi.
````Quas nunc concipiam per nova vota preces?
```Credo etiam magnos, quo sum tam turpiter usus,
````Muneris oblati pcenituisse Deos.
```Optabam certe recipi; sum nempe receptus:
````Oscula ferre; tuii: proximus esse; fui.
```Quo mihi fortunæ tantum? quo régna sine usu?
````Quid, nisi possedi dives avarus opes?
```Sic aret mediis taciti vulgator in undis;
````Pomaque, quæ nullo tempore tangat, habet.
```A tenerâ quisquam sic surgit mane puellâ,
```Protinus ut sanctos possit adiré Deos.
```Sed non blanda, puto, non optima perdidit in me
````Oscula, non omni sohcitavit ope.
```Ilia graves potuit quercus, adamantaque durum,
````Surdaque blanditiis saxa movere suis.
```Digna movere fuit certe vivosque virosque;
````Sed neque turn vixi, nec vir, ut ante, fui.
```Quid juvet, ad surdas si cantet Phemius aures?
````Quid miserum Thamyran picta tabeba juvet?7`
```At quæ non tacitâ formavi gaudia mente!
````Quos ego non finxi disposuique modos!
```Nostra tamen jacuere, velut præmortua, membra
````Turpiter, hesternâ languidiora rosâ.
```Quæ nunc ecce rigent intempestiva, valentque;
````Nunc opus exposcunt, mihtiamque suam.
```Quin istic pudibunda jaces, pars pessima nostri?
````Sic sum polhcitis captus et ante tuis.
```Tu dominam falbs; per te deprensus inermis
````Tristia cum magno damna pudore tub.
```Hanc etiam non est mea dedignata puella
````Molbter admotâ sobcitare manu.
```Sed postquam nullas consurgere posse per artes,
````Immemoremque sui procubuisse videt;
```Quid me ludis? ait; quis te, male sane, jubebat
````Invxtum nostro ponere membra toro?
```Aut te trajectis Ææa venefica lanis
````Devovet, aut abo lassus amore venis.
```Nec mora; desiluit tunicâ velata recinctâ:
````Et decuit nudos proripuisse pedes.
```Neve suæ possent intactam scire ministrae,
````Dedecus hoc sumtâ dissimulavit aquâ.
_He laments that he is not received by his mistress, and complains that
she gives the preference to a wealthy rival._
|And does any one still venerate the liberal arts, or suppose that soft
verses have any merit? Genius once was more precious than gold; but now,
to be possessed of nought is the height of ignorance. After my poems
go where it has been allowed my books. When she has much bepraised
me, her door is shut on him who is praised; talented _though I be_, I
disgracefully wander up and down.
Behold! a Knight gorged with blood, lately enriched, his wealth acquired
my life, enfold him in your charming arms? Can you, my life, rush into
his embrace? If you know it not, that head used to wear a helmet; that
side which is so at your service, was girded with a sword. That left
the shield; touch his right, it has been stained with blood. And can
you touch that right hand, by which some person has met his death?
Alas! where is that tenderness of heart of yours? Look at his scars, the
traces of his former fights; whatever he possesses, by that body was it
a man; covetous one, will you touch the hand that confesses this? I,
unstained, the priest of the Muses and of Phoebus, am he who is singing
his bootless song before your obdurate doors.
Learn, you who are wise, not what we idlers know, but how to follow the
anxious troops, and the ruthless camp; instead of good verses hold sway
she might have proved kind to thee. Jupiter, well aware that nothing is
more potent than gold, was himself the reward of the ravished damsel.
herself prudish, the door-posts bound with brass, the tower made of
herself opened her lap; and, requested to surrender, she did surrender.
But when the aged Saturn held the realms of the heavens, the ground kept
all money deep in its recesses. To the shades below had he removed brass
and silver, and, together with gold, the weight of iron; and no ingots
were there _in those times_. But she used to give what was better, corn
without the crooked plough-share, apples too, and honey found in the
hollow oak. And no one used with sturdy plough to cleave the soil;
the limit of the paths of men. Human nature, against thyself hast thou
been so clever; and for thy own destruction too ingenious. To what
purpose turn hostile hands to arms? What hast thou to do with the sea?
With the earth thou mightst have been content. Why not seek the heavens
so far as thou mayst. Quirinus, Liber, and Alcides, and Caesar but
Instead of corn, we dig the solid gold from the earth; the soldier
possesses riches acquired by blood. To the poor is the Senate-house
grave; hence the knight so proud. Let them possess it all; let the field
and cruel warfare. Only, in their greediness, let them not tear away my
mistress; and 'tis enough, so they but allow something to belong to the
poor.
But now-a-days, he that is able to give away plenty, rules it _over a
woman_ like a slave, even should she equal the prudish Sabine dames. The
I were to make presents, both of them would entirely disappear from
the house. Oh! if any God is the avenger of the neglected lover, may he
change riches, so ill-gotten, into dust.
_He laments the death of the Poet Tibullus._
|If his mother has lamented Memnon, his mother Achilles, and if sad
deaths influence the great Goddesses; plaintive Elegy, unbind thy
sorrowing tresses; alas! too nearly will thy name be derived from fact!
both his quiver inverted, and his bow broken, and his torch without a
flame; behold how wretched with drooping wings he goes: and how he beats
his naked breast with cruel hand. His locks dishevelled about his neck
receive his tears, and his mouth resounds with sobs that convulse his
body. 'Twas thus, beauteous Iulus, they say that thou didst go forth
from thy abode, at the funeral of his brother Æneas. Not less was Venus
groin of the youth.
And yet we Poets are called 'hallowed,' and the care of the Deities;
Inexorable Death, forsooth, profanes all that is hallowed; upon all she
astounded wild beasts? The same father is said, in the lofty woods, to
the mouths of the poets are refreshed by the waters of Piëria: him, too,
has his last day overwhelmed in black Avernus; his verse alone escapes
the all-consuming pile. The fame of the Trojan toils, the work of
name; the one, his recent choice, the other his first love.
Destinies snatch away the good, (pardon the confession) I am tempted to
think that there are no Deities. Live piously; pious _though you be_,
you shall die; attend the sacred worship; _still_ ruthless Death shall
trust in the excellence of your verse; see! Tibullus lies prostrate; of
so much, there hardly remains _enough_ for a little urn to receive.
And, hallowed Poet, have the flames of the pile consumed thee, and have
they not been afraid to feed upon that heart of thine? They could have
burned the golden temples of the holy Gods, that have dared a crime so
there are some, too, who affirm that she did not withhold her tears. But
ashes; here a sister came to share the grief with her wretched mother,
tearing her unadorned locks. And with thy relatives, both Nemesis and
solitude. Delia, as she departed, said, "More fortunately was I beloved
by thee; so long as I was thy flame, thou didst live." To her said
Nemesis: "What dost thou say? Are my sufferings a pain to thee? When
If, however, aught of us remains, but name and spirit, Tibullus will
with thy Calvus, having thy youthful temples bound with ivy. Thou
too, Gallus, (if the accusation of the injury of thy friend is false)
Of these, thy shade is the companion; if only there is any shade of the
body, polished Tibullus; thou hast swelled the blessed throng. Rest,
bones, I pray, in quiet, in the untouched urn; and may the earth prove
not heavy for thy ashes.
_He complains to Ceres that during her rites he is separated from his
mistress._
lies apart on a solitary couch. Yellow Ceres, having thy floating locks
crowned with ears of corn, why dost thou interfere with my pleasures by
thy rites? Thee, Goddess, nations speak of as bounteous everywhere: and
no one is less unfavorable to the blessings of mankind.
In former times the uncouth peasants did not parch the corn; and the
threshing floor was a name unknown on earth. But the oaks, the early
sod, were the food of men. Ceres was the first to teach the seed to
swell in the fields, and with the sickle did she cut her coloured locks;
she first forced the bulls to place their necks beneath the yoke; and
she with crooked tooth turned up the fallow ground. Can any one believe
that she takes delight in the tears of lovers, and is duly propitiated
with misery and single-blessedness? Nor yet (although she loves the
fruitful fields) is she a coy one; nor lias she a breast devoid of
love. The Cretans shall be my witnesses; and the Cretans do not feign
There, he who rules the starry citadel of the world, a little child,
drank milk with tender lips. There is full confidence in the witness;
by its foster-child the witness is recommended I think that Ceres will
confess her frailties, so well known.
pierced the backs of the wild beasts with unerring hand. She beheld, and
when her tender marrow caught the flame; on the one side Shame, on the
other Love, inflamed her. Shame was conquered by Love; you might see the
furrows lying dry, and the crops coming up with a very small proportion
the land, and the crooked plough had broken the hard earth, and the
seed had fallen equally scattered over the wide fields; the hopes of the
deceived husbandman were vain.
The Goddess, the guardian of corn, was lingering in the lofty woods;
the wreaths of com had fallen from her flowing locks. Crete alone
was fertile in its fruitful year; all places, whither the Goddess had
betaken herself, were one continued harvest. Ida, the locality itself
for groves, grew white with corn, and the wild boar cropped the ears
years; he wished that the love of Ceres might prove lasting.
Whereas, yellow-haired Goddess, single-blessedness would have been sad
to thee; this am I now compelled by thy rites to endure. Why should I
be sad, when thy daughter has been found again by thee, and rules over
realms, only less than Juno in rank? This festive day calls for both
Venus, and songs, and wine. These gifts is it fitting to bear to the
ruling Gods.
_He tells his mistress that he cannot help loving her._
|Much and long time have I suffered; by your faults is my patience
overcome. Depart from my wearied breast, disgraceful Love. In truth I
have now liberated myself, and I have burst my chains; and I am ashamed
to have borne what it shamed me not to endure. I have conquered; and
avail thee; often has the bitter potion given refreshment to the sick.
And could I then endure, repulsed so oft from thy doors, to lay a
keep watch before thy street door, for some stranger I know not whom,
that you were holding in your embrace? And did I behold it, when the
wearied paramour came out of your door, carrying off his jaded and
exhausted sides? Still, this is more endurable than the fact that I was
myself your keeper, myself your husband, myself your companion? And,
celebrated by me forsooth, did you please the public: my passion was
the cause of passion in many. Why mention the base perjuries of your
in signs arranged _beforehand?_ She was reported to me to be ill;
headlong and distracted I ran; I arrived; and, to my rival she was not
Bearing these things, and others on which I am silent, I have oft
endured them; find another in my stead, who could put up with these
things. Now my ship, crowned with the votive chaplet, listens in safety
to the swelling waves of the ocean. Cease to lavish your blandishments
and the words which once availed; I am not a fool, as once I was. Love
on this side, Hatred on that, are struggling, and are dragging my tender
heart in opposite directions; but Love, I think, still gets the better.
loves not his yoke; still, that which he hates he bears.
I fly from treachery; your beauty, as I fly, brings me back; I abhor the
failings of your morals; your person I love. Thus, I can neither live
without you, nor yet with you; and I appear to be unacquainted with
my own wishes. I wish that either you were less handsome, or less
unprincipled. So beauteous a form does not suit morals so bad. Your
actions excite hatred; your beauty demands love. Ah wretched me! she is
more potent than her frailties.
O pardon me, by the common rites of our bed, by all the Gods who so
often allow themselves to be deceived by you, and by your beauty, equal
to a great Divinity with me, and by your eyes, which have captivated
my own; whatever you shall be, ever shall you be mine; only do you make
choice whether you will wish me to wish as well to love you, or whether
I am to love you by compulsion. I would rather spread my sails and use
propitious gales; since, though I should refuse, I shall still be forced
to love.
_He complains that he has rendered his mistress so celebrated by his
verses, as to have thereby raised for himself many rivals._
|What day was that, on which, ye birds of no white hue, you sent forth
your ominous notes, ever sad to me in my loves? Or what star must I
consider to be the enemy of my destiny? Or what Deities am I to complain
own, whom I commenced alone to love, I fear that with many she must be
shared by me.
Am I mistaken? Or has she gained fame by my poems? 'Tis so; by my genius
has she been made public. And justly; for why have I made proclamation
She pleases, and I the procurer; by my guidance is the lover introduced;
by my hands has her door been opened. Whether verses are of any use,
is matter of doubt; at all events, they have injured me; they have
exploits of Caesar existed; Corinna alone warmed my genius. Would that I
had meddled with verses against the will of the Muses; and that Phoebus
had deserted the work commenced! And yet, it is not the custom to listen
wanting to my words.
Through us, Scylla, who robbed her father of his white hair, bears the
the vast space, and have formed the three mouths for the dog bristling
thousand arms; and the heroes captivated by the voice of the two-shaped
Æolus; the treacherous Tantalus thirsts in the middle of the stream. Of
Niobe we have made the rock, of the damsel, the she-bear; the Cecropian
him, he cleaves the waves. Why mention Proteus, and the Theban seed,
their mouths? Why, charioteer, that thy sisters distil amber tears?
struck?
The fertile license of the Poets ranges over an immense space; and
it ties not its words to the accuracy of history. So, too, ought
my mistress to have been deemed to be falsely praised; now is your
credulity a mischief to me.
_He describes the Festival of Juno, as celebrated at Falisci, the native
place of his wife._
As my wife was born at Falisci, so fruitful in apples, we repaired to
were preparing the chaste festival of Juno, with distinguished games,
and the heifer of the country. 'Twas a great remuneration for my stay,
to be acquainted with the ceremony; although a path, difficult from the
ascent, leads the way thither. There stands a grove, ancient, and shaded
with numberless trees; look at it, you must confess that a Divinity
exists in the spot. An altar receives the prayers, and the votive
incense of the pious; an altar made without skill, by ancient hands.
When, from this spot, the pipe has given the signal with its usual note,
has fed on its own plains; calves, too, not yet threatening with the
forehead to inspire fear; and the pig, a smaller victim, from its lowly
sty; the leader too, of the flock, with his horns bending back over his
hardy temples; the goat alone is odious to the Goddess queen. By her
desisted from the flight she had commenced. Even now, by the boys,
the author of her wound. Where the Goddess is to come, the youths and
lie. Their virgin hair is adorned with gold and gems; and the proud
mantle conceals their feet, bedecked with gold. After the Grecian manner
vessels entrusted to them on their heads, placed beneath. The people
procession comes up; and she herself follows after her priestesses.
Argive is the appearance of the procession; Agamemnon slain, Halesus
exile, having wandered over both land and sea, he erected lofty walls
with prospering hand. He taught his own Falisci the rites of Juno.
May they be ever propitious to myself, may they be ever so to her own
people.
_He entreats his mistress, if she will not be constant, at least, to
conceal her intrigues from him._
|Beauteous since you are, I do not forbid your being frail; but let it
not be a matter of course, that wretched I should know it. Nor does any
severity of mine command you to be quite correct; but it only entreats
you to try to conceal the truth. She is not culpable, whoever can deny
that she has been culpable; and 'tis only the confession of error that
makes a woman disgraced. What madness is it to confess in light of day
what lies concealed in night? And what you do in secret, to say openly
that it is done? The strumpet about to entertain some obscure Roman,
first keeps out the public by fastening up the bar. And will you make
known your frailties to malicious report? And will you make proof of
your own criminality? May your mind be more sound, or, at least, may you
imitate the chaste; and although you are not, let me suppose that you
are chaste. What you do, still do the same; only deny that you do so;
and be not ashamed in public to speak the language of chastity. There is
the occasion which demands wantonness; sate it with every delight; far
thence be all modesty. Soon as you take your departure thence; away at
once with all lasciviousness, and leave your frailties in your chamber=
```Illic nec tunicam tibi sit posuisse rubori,
````Nec femori impositum sustinuisse femur:
```Illic purpureis condatur lingua labellis:
````Inque modos Venerem mille figuret amor;
```Illic nec voces, nec verba juvantia cessent;
````Spondaque lascivâ mobilitate tremat.=
With your garments put on looks that dread accusation; and let modesty
disavow improper pursuits. Deceive the public, deceive me, too; in my
ignorance, let me be mistaken, and allow me to enjoy my silly credulity.
Why do I so often espy letters sent and received? Why one side and the
more than happens in sleep, and your neck bearing the marks of teeth?
The fading itself alone you do not bring before my eyes; if you hesitate
consulting your own reputation, still, spare me. My senses fail me, and
I am expiring, oft as you confess your failings; and the drops flow,
chilled throughout my limbs. Then do I love you; then, in vain, do I
but together with you.
No enquiries, for my part, will I make, nor will I try to know what
you shall attempt to conceal; and to me it shall be the same as a false
charge. If, however, you shall be found detected in the midst of your
guilt, and if criminality shall be beheld by my eyes; what has been
plainly seen, do you deny to have been plainly seen; my own eyes shall
give way to your assertions.'Tis an easy conquest for you to vanquish
me, who desire to be vanquished. Let your tongue only be mindful to
say--"I did not do it!" since it is your lot to conquer with two words;
although not by the merit of your cause, still conquer through your
judge.
_He tells Venus that he now ceases to write Elegies._
|Seek a new Poet, mother of the tender Loves; here the extreme
the Pelignian fields, have composed; nor have my sportive lays disgraced
even through a long line of ancestors, and not lately made a Knight
in the hurly-burly of warfare. Mantua delights in Virgil, Verona in
Catullus; I shall be called the glory of the Pelignian race; which its
walls of the watery Sulmo, which occupy but a few acres of land, "Small
as you are, I will call you great, who were able to produce a Poet
beauteous boy, raise your golden standard from my fields. The horned
steeds must a more extended plain be paced. Unwarlike Elegies, my
am dead and gone.----
the first edition which Ovid gave to the public of his 'Amores' was
in five Books; but that on revising his work, he preferred (praetulit)
these three books to the former five. It is supposed that he rejected
many of those Elegies which were of too free a nature and were likely to
that 'ut jam,' in this line, has exactly the force of 'quamvis,'
means Heroic or Hexameter verses. It is supposed that he alludes to the
battle of the Giants or the Titans, on which subject he had begun to
write an heroic poem. In these lines Ovid seems to have had in view the
line (as is the case in Heroic verse) had as many feet as the first,
namely, six : but that Cupid stole a foot from the Hexameter, and
reduced it to a Pentameter, whereby the Poet was forced to recur to the
quiver, filled with arrows, was used by most of the nations that
excelled in archery, among whom were the Scythians, Persians, Lycians,
Thracians, and Cretans. It was made of leather, and was sometimes
adorned with gold or painting. It had a lid, and was suspended by a belt
from the right shoulder. Its usual position was on the left hip, and it
was thus worn by the Scythians and Egyptians. The Cretans, however,
wore it behind the back, and Diana, in her statues, is represented as so
doing. This must have been the method in which Cupid is intended in the
present instance to wear it, as he has to unloose the quiver before he
takes out the arrow. Some Commentators, however, would have 'solutâ' to
write in Hexameters and Pentameters, or, in other words, in the Elegiac
Erato, under whose protection were those Poets whose theme was Love. He
bids her wreathe her hair with myrtle, because it was sacred to Venus;
while, on the other hand, laurels would be better adapted to the Heroic
Muse. The myrtle is said to love the moisture and coolness of the
sacred to Venus and Cupid. By yoking them to the chariot of Mars, the
shout Io triumphe,' as the procession moves along. Lactantius speaks
of a poem called 'the Triumph of Cupid,' in which Jupiter and the other
adopted son of Julius Cæsar, was said to be descended from Venus,
had many faults, it must be admitted that he was, like Julius, a most
this Elegy was composed during the life-time of both of his parents, and
means 'one who leaps off.' The figure is derived from those equestrians
who rode upon several horses, or guided several chariots, passing from
the one to the other. This sport was very frequently exhibited in
the Roman Circus. Among the Romans, the 'desuitor' generally wore a
'pileus,' or cap of felt. The Numidian, Scythian, and Armenian soldiers,
usually translated by the word 'supper'; but as being the chief meal of
the day, and being in general, (at least during the Augustan age) taken
reclining on the couch at the entertainment, mostly leaned on his left
elbow during the meal, and as two or more persons lay on the same couch,
the head of one person reached to the breast of him who lay above him,
and the lower person was said to lie on the bosom of the other. Among
the Romans, the usual number of persons occupying each couch was three.
Sometimes, however, four occupied one couch; while, among the Greeks,
only two reclined upon it. In this instance, he describes the lady as
occupying the place below her husband, and consequently warming his
breast with her head. For a considerable time after the fashion of
reclining at meals had been introduced into Rome, the Roman ladies sat
at meals while the other sex was recumbent. Indeed, it was generally
considered more becoming for females to be seated, especially if it was
a party where many persons were present. Juvenal, however, represents a
bride as reclining at the marriage supper on the bosom of her husband.
On the present occasion, it is not very likely that the ladies
were particular about the more rigid rules of etiquette. It must be
of Hippodamia to Pirithous, and the battle between the Centaurs and the
to do so, but still she must come before her husband; perhaps, that
he may have the pleasure of gazing upon her without the chance of
detection; the more especially as she would not recline till her husband
first to introduce the practice of wearing rings among the Romans. The
Romans generally wore one ring, at least, and mostly upon the fourth
finger of the left hand. Down to the latest period of the Republic, the
rings were mostly of iron, and answered the'purpose of a signet.
The right of wearing a gold ring remained for several centuries the
exclusive privilege of Senators, Magistrates, and Knights. The emperors
were not very scrupulous on whom they conferred the privilege of wearing
the gold ring, and Severus and Aurelian gave the right to all Roman
soldiers. Vain persons who had the privilege, literally covered their
fingers with rings, so much so, that Quintilian thinks it necessary to
warn the orator not to have them above the middle joint of the fingers.
The rings and the gems set in them, were often of extreme beauty and
value. From Juvenal and Martial we learn that the coxcombs of the
day had rings for both winter and summer wear. They were kept in
hold the altar while the suppliant was praying to the Deities; he here
directs her, while she is mentally uttering imprecations against her
husband, to fancy that the table is the altar, and to take hold of it
whose office it was to mix the wine and water to the taste of the
either puts upon the table, or gives back to the servant, when she has
refer to some choice morsel picked out of the husband's plate, which, as
position, if she reclined below her husband, she would be almost obliged
injunctions would imply either a very lax state of etiquette at the
Reman parties, or, what is more probable, that the present company was
or clothing for anything, as for a couch, or for tapestry. Let us
charitably suppose it here to mean the table cloth; as the passage will
not admit of further examination, and has of necessity been somewhat
mentioned, are clearly the coverlets of the couch which he has before
mentioned in the 41st line; and from this it is evident, that during the
the custom to repose in the middle of the day. This the Spaniards call
windows of the ancients, see the Notes to the Pontic Epistles, Book iii.
Ep. iii. 1. 5, and to the Metamorphoses, Book xiv. 1. 752. He means that
Elegy x. 1. GO, he says, 'Corinna, (so called by a fictitious name) the
subject of song through the whole city, had imparted a stimulus to my
geuius.' It has been supposed by some Commentators, that under this name
he meant Julia, either the daughter or the grand-daughter of the emperor
Augustus, but there seems really to be no ground for such a belief;
indeed, the daughter of Augustus had passed middle age, when Ovid was
still in boyhood. It is most probable that Corinna was ouly an ideal
personage, existing in the imagination of the Poet; and that he intended
the name to apply to his favourite mistress for the time being, as,
though he occasionally denies it, still, at other times, he admits that
his passion was of the roving kind. There are two females mentioned in
history of the name of Coriuna. One was a Theban poetess, who excelled
in Lyric composition, and was said to have vanquished Pindar himself in
a Lyric contest; while the other was a native of Thespiæ, in Bceotia.
'The former, who was famous for both her personal charms and her mental
the under-garment with both sexes among the Romans. When the wearer was
out of doors, or away from home, it was fastened round the waist with a
belt or girdle, but when at home and wishing to be entirely at ease, it
was, as in the present instance, loose or ungirded. Both sexes usually
wore two tunics. In female dress, Varro seems to call the outer tunic
'subucula,' and the 'interior tunica' by the name also of 'indusium.'
The outer tunic was also called 'stola,' and, with the 'palla' completed
the female dress. The 'tunica interior,' or what is here called tunica,'
was a simple shift, and in early times had no sleeves. According to
Nonius, it fitted loosely on the body, and was not girded when the
'stola' or outer tunic was put on. Poor people, who could not afford
to purchase a 'toga,' wore the tunic alone; whence we find the lower
her hair was scattered, flowing over her shoulders and not arranged on
king of Babylon, and was famous for her extreme beauty, and the talent
which she displayed as a ruler. She was also as unscrupulous in her
beén two famous courtesans of the name of Lais. The first was carried
captive, when a child, from Sicily, in the second year of the 91st
Olympiad, and being taken to Corinth, became famous throughout Greece
for her extreme beauty, and the high price she put upon her favours.
Many of the richest and most learned men resorted to her, and became
smitten by her charms. The second Lais was the daughter of Alcibiades,
by his mistress, Timandra. When Demosthenes applied for a share of her
favours, she made the extravagant demand of ten thousand drachmae, upon
which, regaining his wisdom (which had certainly forsaken him for a
was frequently bound by a chain to his post, that he might not forsake
were the military watches that were kept on guard, either by night or
day, while the term 'vigiliæ,' was only applied to the watch by night.
ghosts of the departed entered largely among the Roman superstitions.
See an account of the Ceremony, in the Fifth Book of the Fasti, 1. 422,
line of the Epistle of De'ianira to Hercules. Ovid says, that he has
often pleaded for him to his mistress; indeed, the Roman ladies often
showed more cruelty to the slaves, both male and female, than the men
porter's wish that the night should pass quickly on, as he would be
relieved in the morning, and was probably forbidden to sleep during the
Roman doors consisted of a bolt placed at the bottom of eacn 'foris,' or
wing of the door, which fell into a socket made in the sill. By way of
additional precaution, at night, the front door was secured by a bar of
wood or iron, here called 'sera,' which ran across, and was inserted in
sockets on each side of the doorway. Hence it was necessary to remove or
beverage of the Roman slaves, but they were allowed a small quantity of
wiue, which was increased on the Saturnalia. 'Far,' or 'spelt,' formed
their general sustenance, of which they received one 'libra' daily.
Salt and oil were also allowed them, and sometimes fruit, but seldom
literally, 'around my temples' This-expression is used, because it was
supposed that the vapours of excessive wine affect the brain. He says
that he has only taken a moderate quantity of wine, although the chaplet
carried by the Romans, for their guidance after sunset, and were
generally made of wooden staves or twigs, bound by a rope around them,
in a spiral form, or else by circular bands at equal distances. The
inside of the torch was filled with flax, tow, or dead vegetable
matter, impregnated with pitch, wax, rosin, oil, or other inflammable
that he has taken more than a moderate quantity of wine, 'modicum
'ergastulum,' or prison for slaves, that was attached to most of the
Roman farms, whither the refractory slaves were sent from the City to
work in chains. It was mostly under ground, and, was lighted with narrow
windows, too high from the ground to be touched with the hand.
Slaves who had displeased their masters were usually sent there for a
punishment, and those of uncouth habits were kept there. Plutarch says
that they were established, on the conquest of Italy, in consequence
of the number of foreign slaves imported for the cultivation of
the conquered territory. They were finally abolished by the Emperor
were bivalve or folding-doors, his 'conservæ,' or 'fellow' slaves,' from
the fact of their being obedient to the will of a slave. Plautuâ, in
the Asinaria, act. ii sc. 3, has a similar expression:--'Nolo ego
fores, conservas meas a te verberarier.' 'I won't have my door, my
refused the arms of Achilles, became mad, and slaughtered a flock
of sheep, fancying that they were the sons of Atreus, and his enemy
his father, Agamemnon, by slaying his own mother, Clytemnestra, together
with her paramour, Ægistheus. He also attempted to attack the Furies,
or Mae-nalian, was the daughter of Iasius, and was famous for her skill
in the chase. Atalanta, the Boeotian, was the daughter of Schceneus,
and was renowned for her swiftness, and for the race in which she was
outstripped by Hippomenes. The Poet has here mistaken the one for the
other, calling the Arcadian one the daughter of Schoeneus. The story of
the Arcadian Atalanta is told in the Eighth Book of the Metamorphoses,
and that of the daughter of Schceneus, at the end of the Tenth Book of
wear the sacred fillets, 'vittse.' She was ravished by Ajax Oileus, in
strike a freeborn human citizen. See Acts, c. xxii. v. 25. 'And as they
hound him with thongs, Paul said unto the Centurion that stood by, Is it
lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemncd?' This
been satisfied with tearing her tunic down to the waist, where the
girdle should have stopped short the rent; whereas, in all probability,
with many of the Romans, to tear and scratch their Slaves on the least
was greatly esteemed for its extreme whiteness. Paros was one of the
originally a military phrase, signifying 'on guard'; from which It came
'Dipsas,' is derived from reality, meaning thereby that she is so called
parallelogram with equal sides, but not having right angles, and hence,
from the resemblance, a spinning wheel, or winder. The 'licia' were the
cords or thrums of the old warp, or the threads of the old web to which
the threads of the new warp were joined. Here, however, the word seems
to mean the threads alone. The spinning-wheel was much used in magical
incantations, not only among the Romans, but among the people of
Northern and Western Europe. It is not improbable that the practice was
founded on the so-called threads of destiny, and it was the province of
the wizard, or sorceress, by his or her charms, to lengthen or shorten
those threads, according as their customers might desire. Indeed, in
some parts of Europe, at the present day, charms, in the shape of forms
of words, are said to exist, which have power over the human life at any
distance from the spot where they are uttered; a kind of superstition
which dispenses with the more cumbrous paraphernalia of the
spinning-wheel. Some Commentators think that the use of the 'licia'
implied that the minds of individuals were to be influenced at the will
of the enchanter, in the same way as the old thrums of the warp are
caught up and held fast by the new threads; this view, however, seems
to dispense with the province of the wheel in the incantation. See
the Second Book of the Fasti, 1. 572. The old woman there mentioned
as performing the rites of the Goddess, Tacita, among her other
proceedings, 'binds the enchantea threads on the dark-coloured
called 'hippomanes,' which was said to flow from mares when in a
prurient state. Hesiod says, that 'hippomanes' was a herb which produced
madness in the horses that ate of it. Pliny, in his Eighth Book, says
that it is a poisonous excrescence of the size of a fig, and of a black
colour, which grows on the head of the mare, and which the foal at its
birth is in the habit of biting off, which, if it neglects to do, it is
not allowed by its mother to suck. This fictitious substance was said to
ever exists in Italy, he may very possibly have seen the moon of a deep
'transformed,' seems here to be a preferable reading to 'vivam,'
'alive.' Burmann, however, thinks that the 'striges' were the ghosts of
dead sorcerers and wizards, and that the Poet means here, that Dipsas
had the power of transforming herself into a 'strix' even while living,
and that consequently 'vivam' is the proper reading. The 'strix' was
a fabulous bird of the owl kind, which was said to suck the blood of
children in the cradle. Seethe Sixth Book of the Fasti, 1. 141, and the
of the eye, is that part through which light is conveyed to the optic
nerve. Some persons, especially females, were said by the ancients to
have a double pupil, which constituted what was called 'the evil eye.'
Pliny the Elder says, in his Seventh Book, that 'all women injure by
their glances, who have a double pupil.' The grammarian, Haephestion,
tells us, in his Fifth Book, that the wife of Candaulcs, king of Lydia,
had a double pupil. Heinsius suggests, that this was possibly the
case with the Ialysian Telchines, mentioned in the Seventh Book of the
Metamorphoses, 1. 365, 'whose eyes corrupting all things by the very
looking upon them, Jupiter, utterly hating, thrust them beneath the
Commentator here makes this remark: 'As though it were any more
difficult to summon forth from the tomb those who have long been dead,
than those who are iust deceased.' He forgot that Ovid had to make up
his line, and that 'antiquis proavos atavosque' made three good feet,
astrology, and the adverse and favourable aspects of the stars. We
are to suppose that she is the agent of the young man who has seen the
damsel, and she is telling her that the rising star of Venus is about to
line, as it stands at present, is not pure Latin; and, indeed, 'curæ
habet,' 'makes it his care,' seems a very unusual mode of expression.
He suggests another reading--'et, cultæ quod tibi défit, habet,' 'and
he possesses that which is wanting for your being well-dressed,' namely,
blusned at the remark of the old hag, that the young man was worthy to
be purchased by her, if he had not been the first to make an offer. We
must suppose that here the Poet peeped through a chink of the door, as
he was on the other side, listening to the discourse; or he may have
reasonably guessed that she did so, from the remark made in the same
advising her to pretend modesty, by looking down on her lap, so as not
to give away even a look, until she has seen what is deposited there,
and then only to give gracious glances in proportion to her present. It
was the custom for the young simpletons who lavished their money on the
their domestic virtues. The hag hints, that the chastity of the Sabine
women was only the result of their want of good breeding. 'Tatio
régnante' seems to point to the good old times, in the same way as our
old songsters have it, 'When good king Arthur reigned.' Tatius
reigned jointly at Rome with Romulus. See the Fourteenth Book of the
now in a more civilized state, than when they were fighting just without
the walls of Rome; now they are solely engaged in foreign conquests, and
frowned here at her last remark, on which she tells her she must
learn to dispense with these frowns, and that when she dispels
them, 'excutit,' so many faults which might otherwise prove to her
she might escape the importunity of the suitors, proposed that they
should try to bend the bow of Ulysses, promising her hand to him who
should prove successful. The hag, however, says that, with all her
pretended chastity, Penelope only wanted to find out who was the most
stalwart man among her lovers, in order that she might choose him for a
especially worn by musicians. She is supposed to refer to the statue
of Apollo, which was erected on the Palatine Hill by Augustus; and
her design seems to be, to shew that poetry and riches are not so
incompatible as the girl may, from her lover's poverty, be led to
some rich slave who has bought his own liberty. As many of the Roman
slaves were skilful at various trades and handicrafts, and were probably
allowed the profits of their work after certain hours in the day, it
would be no uncommon thing for a slave, with his earnings, to purchase
his liberty. Some of the slaves practised as physicians, while others
with chalk, 'gypsum,' the feet of such slaves as were newly imported for
'quinquatria,' which is evidently a corrupt reading, 'circum atria' has
been adopted. She is advising the girl not to be led away by notions
of nobility, founded on the number of 'ceræ,' or waxen busts of their
ancestors, that adorned the 'atria,' or halls of her admirers. See the
Fasti, Book i. line 591, and the Note to the passage; also the Epistle
the festival of Isis for several successive days, and during that period
Terence show the part which the intriguing slaves and handmaids acted on
'gleanings.' She says, that each of the servants must ask for a little,
and those little sums put together will make a decent amount collected
from her lovers. No doubt her meaning is, that the mistress should
she has exhausted all other excuses for getting a present, to have the
birth-day cake by her, and to pretend that it is her birth-day; in
order that her lover may take the hint, and present her with a gift. The
birth-day cake, according to Servius, was made of flour and honey; and
being set on tabic before the guests, the person whose birth-day it was,
ate the first slice, after which the others partook of it, and wished
him happiness and prosperity. Presents, too, were generally made on
or' Sacred Street, from the old Senate house at Rome towards the
Amphitheatre, and up the Capitoline hill. For the sale of all kinds of
luxuries, it seems to have had the same rank in Rome that Regent Street
holds in London. The procuress tells her, that if her admirer makes no
presents, she must turn the conversation to the 'Via Sacra;' of course,
asking him such questions as, What is to be bought there? What is the
price of such and such a thing? And then she is to say, that she is in
resembles the famous one attributed to Machiavelli, that 'speech was
things, but let it be your intention to ruin him outright by your
the same person to whom Ovid addresses the Fourth and Seventh Pontic
Epistle in the Second Book. It certainly was not Pomponius Atticus, the
night-watches of the Roman army, which succeeded each other every three
hours. Each guard, or watch, consisted of four men, of whom one acted as
and Plautus, as well as those of Ovid, we find that the youths of Rome
were not very scrupulous about kicking down the door of an obdurate
Pénélope to Ulysses, and the speech of Ulysses in the Thirteenth Book of
word 'Desinat' means 'Let him leave off saying so,' or 'Let him cease to
'a raving female,' from the Greek word paivopai, 'to be mad.' He alludes
be at ease in their leisure moments at home, they were in the habit of
loosening the girdle which fastened the tunic; from this circumstance,
'lying in bed and reclining in the shade.' The shade of foliage would
have peculiar attractions in the cloudless climate of Italy, especially
as 'stipendum merere,' 'to earn the pay of a soldier,' whence it came to
signify 'to sene as a soldier.' The ancient accounts differ materially
was carrying water, when she was attacked by a Satyr, and rescued by
Neptune. See the Epistle of Hero to Leander, 1. 131, and the Note to the
among the men, and of the 'palla,' among the women, which extended in
folds across the breast, was used as a pocket, in which they carried
money, purses, letters, and other articles. When the party was seated,
kept a house for the purposes of prostitution, and who generally robbed
his victims of the profits of their unfortunate calling. This was called
'lenocinium,' and the trade was not forbidden, though the 'lenones' were
considered 'infames,' or 'disgraced,' and thereby lost certain political
was taken by the Praetor, and was called 'jusjurandum in judicio,'
whereas the evidence of parties themselves was termed 'jusjurandum in
jure.' It was given on oath by such as the Praetor or other judge chose
box, or chest, in which the Romans were accustomed to place their money;
the 'cen-tumviri,' a body of one hundred and five officers, whose duty
it was to assist the Praetor in questions where the right to property
was litigated. In the Second Book of the Tristia, 1. 93, we are informed
'patroni' defended their 'clientes' gratuitously, and it would have been
person who hired the services, or the property of another, for a fixed
price. The word sometimes means 'a contractor,' or the person with
whom the bargain by the former party is made. See the public contract
of the Vestal virgin Tarpeia. See the Fasti, Book i. 1. 261, and Note;
Eriphyle, for having betrayed his father Amphiaraus. See the Second Book
of the Fasti, 1. 43, and the Third Book of the Pontic Epistles, Ep. i.
to Hercules, and the Tenth Book of the Metamorphoses 1. 113, with the
of Alcinoiis, king of the Phæacians, are celebrated by Homer in the
the hair of the Roman ladies was divided among several slaves, who were
called by the general terms of 'cosmetæ,' and 'omatrices.' It was the
province of one to curl the hair with a hot iron, called 'calamistrum,'
which was hollow, and was heated in wood ashes by a slave who, from
'cinis,' 'ashes,' was called 'ciniflo.' The duty of the 'psecas' came
next, whose place it was to anoint the hair. Then came that of the
'ornatrix,' who parted the curls with a comb or bodkin; this seems to
name, as it is evidently of Greek origin. One of the dogs of Actæon is
'signs,' 'signals.' or 'letters.' In Nizard's French translation it is
see the Note to the Pontic Epistles, Book ii. El. 9.1. 69, and the
'ploughed over'; which term is properly applied to the action of the
'stylus,' in ploughing through the wax upon the tablets. Suetonius
relates that Julius Caesar, when he was murdered in the Senate House,
having read his letter through. This she could do the more readily, as
she could use the same tablets, smoothing the wax with the broad end of
for the 'stylus,' or pen used for writing on the wax tablets. It was
generally of iron or copper, but sometimes of gold. The case in which it
tablets 'vile,' in comparison with their great services to him: for,
according to Pliny, Book xvi. c. 15, maple was the most valued wood
for tablets, next to 'citrus,' cedar, or citron wood. It was also more
useful than citron, because it could be cut into leaves, or laminae, of
omen by Laodamia, in her Epistle to Protesilaüs, 1. 88. So in the Tenth
Book of the Metamorphoses, in the shocking story of Cinyras and Myrrha;
learn that the honey of Corsica was of a bitter taste, in consequence of
the box-trees and yews, with which the isle abounded, and which latter,
according to him, were poisonous. From Diodorus Siculus we learn that
there were many turpentine trees on the island; this would not tend to
or 'vermilion,' was discovered by Callias, an Athenian, according to
Theophrastus. It was sometimes mixed with the wax used for tablets:
probably not the best, but that which was naturally of a bad colour.
This censure of the tablets is a good illustration of the grapes being
sour. In the last Elegy, before he has received his repulse, he declares
the wax to be 'splen-dida,' 'of brilliaut whiteness through bleaching;'
now, on the other hand, he finds, most ominously, that it is as red as
screech-owl; and not the fabulous bird referred to under that name, in
the Sixth Book of the Fasti, and the thirteenth line of the Eighth Elegy
probably means, 'to call a man on his bail' or 'recognizances.' When the
Praetor had granted an action, the plaintiff required the defendant to
give security for his appearance on the day named. The defendant, on
finding a surety, was said 'vades dare,' or 'vadimonium facere': and the
'vas,' or surety, was said 'spondere.' The plaintiff, if satisfied with
the surety, was said 'vadari reum,' 'to let the defendant go on his
the word 'cognitor' here means, the attorney, or procurator of the
plaintiff, who might, in his absence, carry on the cause for him. In
that case they would translate 'duro,' 'shameless,' or 'impudent.' But
another meaning of the word 'cognitor' is 'a judge,' or 'commissioner,'
and such seems to be the meaning here, in which case 'duras' will mean
'severe,' or 'sour;' 'as,' according to one Commentator, 'judges are
over which the avaricious huncks might lament his squandered substance.
And have I then in reality as well as in name found you full of
in my anger, ought I to pray, but that an old age of rottenness may
Epistle, calls a Calendar by the name of 'Ephemeris,' while a day-book
is meant by the term as used by Ausonius. The word here seems to mean
a 'diary;' while 'tabula' is perhaps a 'day-book,' in which current
expenses are set down, and over which the miser weeps, as the record of
either 'double,' or 'deceitful,' according to the context. He plays on
this twofold meaning, and says that double though they might be, still
truly deceitful they were; and that the two leaves of the tablets were
of no good omen to him. Two-leaved tablets were technically called
celebrate the funeral obsequies of one's parents.' Both the Romans and
the Greeks were accustomed to visit the tombs of their relatives
at certain times, and to offer sacrifices, called 'inferiæ,' or
'parentalia.' The souls of the departed were regarded by the Romans as
Gods, and the oblations to them consisted of milk, wine, victims, or
wreaths of flowers. The Poet here refers to the birds which arose from
the funeral pile of Memnon, and wera said to revisit it annually. See
dew, or the dampness of the night, which would tend, in a hot climate,
to modify the sultriness of the atmosphere. One Commentator thinks that
mostly kept by manumitted slaves; and we learn from the Fasti, Book iii.
mentioned was generally inflicted on the hands of the Roman school-boys,
with a 'ferula,' or stalk of giant-fennel, as we learn from Juvenal,
'jurisconsultus' was to expound and give opinions on the law, much like
the chamber counsel of the present day. They were also known by the name
of 'juris periti,' or 'consulti' only. Cicero gives this definition of
'He is à person who has such a knowledge of the laws and customs which
prevail in a state, as to be able to advise, and secure a person in
his dealings. They advised their clients gratuitously, either in public
places, or at their own houses. They also drew up wills and contracts,
trouble to the Commentators, but it has been well explained by Burmann,
whose ideas on the subject are here adopted. The word 'sponsum' has
been generally looked upon here as a noun substantive, whereas it is the
active supine of the verb 'spondeo,' 'to become bail' or 'security.' The
meaning then is, that some rise early, that they may go and become bail
for a friend, and thereby incur risk and inconvenience, through uttering
a single word, 'spondeo,' 'I become security,' which was the formula
used. The obligation was coutracted orally, and for the purpose of
evidencing it, witnesses were necessary; for this reason the
undertaking was given, as in the present instance, in the presence of a
who pleads the cause of his client in court before the Prætor or other
that this line and the next are spurious. The story of Cephalus
and Procris is related at the close of the Seventh Book of the
sleep upon Endymion, whereas it was Jupiter who did so, as a punishment
for his passion for Juno; he alludes to the youthfulness of the favorite
of Diana, antithetically to the old age of Tithonus, the husband of
black hair was the most frequent, but that of a blonde colour was most
valued. It was not uncommon with them to dye it when turning grey, so as
to make it a black or blonde colour, according to the requirement of the
case. Blonde hair was much esteemed by the Romans, and the ladies were
in the habit of washing their hair with a composition to make it of this
colour. This was called 'spuma caustica,' or, 'caustic soap,' wich was
first used by the Gauls and Germans; from its name, it was probably the
'fila,' 'threads,' is better here than 'vela,' and that it is the
correct reading. The swarthy Seres here mentioned, were perhaps the
Chinese, who probably began to import their silks into Rome about this
period. The mode of producing silk does not seem to have been known to
Virgil, who speaks, in the Second Book of the Georgies, of the Seres
combing it off the leaves of trees. Pliny also, in his Sixth Book, gives
the same account. Ovid, however, seems to refer to silkworms under the
name of 'agrestes tineæ,' in the Fifteenth Book of the Metamorphoses, 1.
probably the 'discemicirium,' and not the 'crinale,' or hair-pin that
was worn in the hair; as the latter was worn when the hair was bound up
at the back of the head; whereas, judging from the length of the hair
of his mistress, she most probably wore it in ringlets. He says that
he never saw her snatch up the bodkin and stick it in the arm of the
unnecessary application of the curling-iron to hair which naturally
naturally assume as advantageous an appearance as the bodkin could
mentions a painting, by Apelles, in which Venus was represented as
rising from the sea. It was placed, by Augustus, in the temple of Julius
Caesar; and the lower part having become decayed, no one could be found
likely than the 'pellex,' or concubine, to resort to charms and drugs,
for the purpose of destroying the good looks of the married woman whose
Romans, that the very mention of death, or disease, was deemed ominous
lately conquered by the arms of Augustus, he says that she must wear
false hair, taken from the German captives. It was the custom to cut
short the locks of the captives, and the German women were famed for the
pleaded the cause of the 'cliens,' without reward, still, by the use of
the word 'pros-tituisse,' Ovid implies that the services of the advocate
were often sold at a price. It must be remembered, that Ovid had been
native of Smyrna, which was a city of Maeonia, a province of Phrygia.
But Plutarch says, that he was called 'Maeonius,' from Maeon, a king of
were the scenes of some portions of the Homeric narrative. The first was
Boeotia, wrote chieflv upon agricultural subjects. See the Pontic
jidcc of the grape before it was boiled down and became 'sapa,'
or 'defrutum.' See the Fasti, Book iv. 1. 779, and the Note to the
the son of Battus, see the Tristia, Book ii. 1. 367, and the Ibis, 1.
'buskin,' see the Tristia, Book ii. 1. 393, and the Note to the passage.
Sophocles was one of the most famous of the Athenian Tragedians. He is
supposed to have composed more than one hundred and twenty tragedies, of
Cilicia, in Asia Minor. He wrote some astronomical poems, of which one,
called 'Phænomena,' still exists. His style is condemned by Quintilian,
although it is here praised by Ovid. His 'Phænomena' was translated into
Menander have perished, we can judge from Terence and Plautus, how well
he depicted the craftiness of the slave, the severity of the father, the
dishonesty of the procuress, and the wheedling ways of the courtesan.
Four of the plays of Terence are translations from Menander. See the
Calabrian by birth. He flourished about 408 years before Christ. The
few fragments of his works that remain, show the ruggedness and uncouth
Attacinus, who wrote on the Argonautic expedition. See the Tristia, Book
to, whose noble poem on the Epicurean philosophy is still in existence
(translated in Bohn's Classical Library). See the Tristia, Book ii. 1.
who introduces himself under the name of Tityrus, in his first Eclogue,
surpassed by the event. Rome is no longer the 'caput urbis,' but the
poet of Equestrian rank, famous for the beauty of his compositions.
He was born in the same year as Ovid, but died at an early age. Ovid
mentions him in the Tristia, Book ii. 1. 447 and 463, Book iv. Ep. x.
considerable merit. See the Tristia, Book ii 1. 445, and the Note to the
make mention of the golden sands of the Tagus, which flowed through the
Romans buried the dead; but in consequence of the bones being disturbed
the Fasti, 1. 81, and the Fourth Book of the Tristia, 1. x. El. 3, he
mentions Sulmo, a town of the Peligni, as the place of his birth. It was
called Gyas. He and his hundred-handed brothers, Briareus and Cæus, were
magic spells, and attributes their efficacy to their being couched
in poetic measures; from which circumstance they received the name of
same manner as magic spells have brought down the moon, arrested the
sun, and turned back rivers towards their source, so have his Elegiac
strains been as wonderfully successful in softening the obduracy of his
Latinized. Bagous, is said to have signified, in the Persian language,
'an eunuch.' It was probably of Chaldæan origin, having that meaning.
As among the Eastern nations of the present day, the more jealous of the
Romans confided the care of their wives or mistresses to eunuch slaves,
temple of Apollo, on the Palatine Hill, was adorned with the statues of
Danaus, the son of Belus, and his forty-nine guilty daughters. It was
built by Augustus, on a spot adjoining to his palace. Ovid mentions
these statues in the Third Elegy of the Third Book of the Tristia, 1.
him go away' from the house; but Nisard's translation renders it 'qu'il
faciet tarde' means: it perhaps applies to the rites of Isis, mentioned
Eighth Elegy of the preceding Book, and the Note to the passage; and the
Pontic Epistles, Book i. line 51, and the Note. The temple of Isis,
at Rome, was in the Campus Martius, or Field of Mars, near the sheep
market. It was noted for the intrigues and assignations of which it was
says, 'Il peut renverser la maison,' 'he can turn the house upside
are about ten various readings. The meaning, however, is clear; he is,
by making false charges, to lead the husband away from a suspicion of
the truth; and to put him, as we say, in common parlance, on the wrong
the stock of money which a slave, with the consent of his master, laid
up for his own, 'his savings.' The slaves of the Romans being not only
employed in domestic offices and the labours of the field, but as agents
or factors for their masters, in the management of business, and as
mechanics and artisans in various trades, great profits were made
through them. As they were often entrusted with a large amount of
property, and considerable temptations were presented to their honesty,
it became the practice to allow the slave to consider a part of
his gains, perhaps a per centage, as his own; this was termed his
'peculium.' According to the strict letter of the law, the 'peculium'
was the property of the master, but, by usage, it was looked upon as the
property of the slave. It was sometimes agreed upon between the
master and slave, that the latter should purchase his liberty with
his 'peculium,' when it amounted to a certain sum. If the slave was
manumitted by the owner in his lifetime, his 'peculium' was considered
informers who have given false evidence. He warns Bagous of their fate,
intending to imply that both his mistress and himself will deny all, if
begins in a strain of sympathy, since his last letter has proved of no
literally, 'to put out at interest.' He tells the eunuch that he has
now the opportunity of conferring obligations, which will bring him in 
alto' to mean 'ex alto pectore,' 'from the depths of her breast.' In
such case the phrase will correspond with our expression, 'to dissemble
discouraged among the Romans. That here referred to was probably the
pantomimic dance, in which, while all parts of the body were called into
action, the gestures of the arms and hands were especially used, whence
the expressions 'manus loquacissimi,' 'digiti clamosi,' 'expressive
hands,' or 'fingers.' During the Republic, and the earlier periods of
the Empire, women never appeared on the stage, but they frequently acted
at the parties of the great. As it was deemed disgraceful for a free man
to dance, the practice at Rome was probably confined to slaves, and the
lowest class of the citizens. See the Fasti, Book iii. 1. 536, and the
the Heroic ages to have been of extremely tall stature. Andromache was
a female name, generally signifies 'having the hair of a flaxen,' or
'golden colour'; here, however, it seems to allude to the complexion,
though it would be difficult to say what tint is meant. Perhaps an
American would have no difficulty in translating it 'a yellow girl.' In
the 43rd line, he makes reference to the hair of a 'flaxen,' or 'golden
reading here, it must mean 'no tablets from which in a hurry you 'have
rubbed off the writing.' 'Non interceptæ' has been suggested, and it
would certainly better suit the sense. 'No intercepted tablets have,
this occasion placed on the table, after the 'coena,' or dinner. The
Poet, his mistress, and his acquaintance, were, probably, reclining
on their respective couches; he probably, pretended to fall asleep to
were pretending to be talking on a different subject from that about
which they were really discoursing, but that he understood their hidden
meaning. See a similar instance mentioned in the Epistle of Paris to
over her favours, that the master (dominus) does over the services of
the moment of taking off the bridal veil, or 'flammeum,' when she has
probably through a fog, it was supposed that she was being subjected to
the word 'Assyrium' is here used by poetical licence, as really meaning
was the custom of the Lydians to tint ivory of a pink colour, that it
literally the mark which was put upon the 'amphorae,' or 'cadi,' the
'casks' of the ancients, to denote the kind, age, or quality of the
wine. Hence the word figuratively means, as in the present instance,
'sort,' or 'quality.' Our word 'brand' has a similar meaning. The finer
kinds of wine were drawn off from the 'dolia,' or large vessels, in
which they were kept into the 'amphoræ,' which were made of earthenware
or glass, and the mouth of the vessel was stopped tight by a plug of
wood or cork, which was made impervious to the atmosphere by being
rubbed over with pitch, clay, or a composition of gypsum. On the
outside, the title of the wine was painted, the date of the vintage
being denoted by the names of the Consuls then in office: and when the
vessels were of glass, small tickets, called 'pittacia,' were suspended
from them, stating to a similar effect. For a full account of
the ancient wines, see Dr. Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman
Book, calls the parrot 'Humanæ sollers imitator linguæ,' 'the clever
that the trumpeters at funerals were called 'siticines.' They headed
the funeral procession, playing mournful strains on the long trumpet,
'tuba,' here mentioned. These were probably in addition to the
'tibicines,' or 'pipers,' whose number was limited to ten by Appius
the parrot had been brought up in the same cage together. He probably
refers to these birds in the thirty-eighth line of the Epistle of Sappho
to Phaon where he mentions the turtle-dove as being black. This Elegy is
remarkable for its simplicity and pathetic beauty, and can hardly fail
to remind the reader of Cowper's Elegies, on the death of the bullfinch,
'cleverly,' rather than 'distinctly,' which would be inconsistent with
Chapter of the Ninth Book of his History of Animals, describes quails
or ortolans, and partridges, as being of quarrelsome habits, and much at
Aphorisms, mentions the seventh, fourteenth, and twentieth, as the
critical days in a malady. Ovid may here possibly allude to the seventh
day of fasting, which was supposed to terminate the existence of the
but Ovid must excuse us if we decline to believe that it said 'vale,'
'farewell,' also; unless, indeed, it had been in the habit of saying so
before; this, perhaps, may have been the case, as it had probably often
human accents, the other birds in the Elysian fields, is ingeniously and
are considered by Heinsius to be spurious, and, indeed, the next line
the patient ass got throughout the year, was in the month of June,
when the festival of Vesta was celebrated, and to which Goddess he had
rendered an important service. See the Sixth Book of the Fasti, 1. 311,
or 'tiring woman' of Corinna. As slaves very often received their names
from articles of dress, Cypassis was probably so called from the
garment called 'cypassis,' which was worn by women and men of effeminate
Telephus by the aid of the spear of Achilles, which had previously
Fasti, 1.199, he speaks of the time when 'a little cottage received
Quiriuus, the begotten of Mars, and the sedge of the stream afforded him
a scanty couch.' The straw-thatched cottage of Romulus was preserved at
Rome for many centuries. See the Fasti, Book iii. 1. 184, and the Note
of the Roman legions, who had served their full time, received a regular
discharge, which was called 'missio,' together with a bounty, either in
money, or an allotment of land. Virgil was deprived of his property near
Mantua, by the officers of Augustus; and in his first Eclogue, under
the name of Tityrus, he relates how he obtained restitution of it on
and the privilege it conferred, see the Tristia, Book, iv, El. 8. 1.
Epistles, namely, the Sixth of the First Book, the Sixth of the Second
Book, and the Ninth of the Fourth Book, to his friend Græcinus. In the
used as a general name for a boat or skiff; but the vessel which was
particularly so called, was long and narrow, and probably received its
name from its resemblance to a kidney-bean, which was called 'ptaselus.'
The 'phaseli' were chiefly used by the Egyptians, and were of various
sizes, from that of a mere boat to a vessel suited for a long voyage.
Appian mentions them as being a medium between ships of war and merchant
vessels. Being built for speed, they were more noted for their swiftness
than for their strength. Juvenal, Sat. xv, 1. 127, speaks of them as
being made of clay; but, of course, that can only refer to 'pha-seli' of
this moment of the deaths of Cornelius Gallus, and T. Haterius, of the
Equcstriai order, whose singular end is mentioned by Valerius Maximus,
probably camelians, which are found on the sea shore, and are of various
for that which causes the delay. 'That is a pleasure which belongs to
couple Malea, the dangerous promontory on the South of Laconia, with the
divided upon the exact meaning of this line. Some think that it refers
to the Constellations of Castor and Pollux, which were considered to be
favourable to mariners; and which Horace mentions in the first line
of his Third Ode, B. i., 'Sic fratres Helenae, lucida sidera,' 'The
brothers of Helen, those brilliant stars.' Others think that it refers
to the luminous appearances which were seen to settle on the masts
of ships, and were called by the name of Castor and Pollux; they were
thought to be of good omen when both appeared, but unlucky when seen
'libellus' here, he probably means some light work, such as a bit of
Romans, see the Fasti, Book iii. 1. 166, and the Tristia, Book iv. El.
misunderstood in Nisard's translation, 'Je ne serai pas non plus la caus
Latium, between Æneas and Turnus, for the hand of Lavinia, the daughter
of Latinus and Amata. See the narrative in the Fourteenth book of the
the contrivance of Romulus, is here alluded to. The narrative will
be found in the Third Book of the Fasti, 1. 203, et seq. It has been
suggested, but apparently without any good grounds, that Tarpeia is here
Canopic mouth of the Nile, at the Western extremity of Egypt, adjoining
to Libya. According to Strabo, its former name was Ammonia. It
still preserves its ancient name in a great degree, as it is called
of the mouths of the Nile, now called Aboukir. The epithet
'genialis,' seems to have been well deserved, as it was famous for its
voluptuousness. Strabo tells us that there was a temple there dedicated
to Serapis, to which multitudes resorted by the canal from Alexandria.
He says that the canal was filled, night and day, with men and women
dancing and playing music on board the vessels, with the greatest
licentiousness. The place was situate on an island of the Nile, and
was about fifteen miles distant from Alexandria. Ovid gives a similar
description of Alexandria, in the Tristia, Book i. El. ii. 1. 79. See
North of Egypt, on the banks of the Nile. It was said to have been built
'sistra' of Isis, see the Pontic Epistles, Book i. El. i. 1. 38, and the
with the dog's head, see the Metamorphoses, Book ix. 1. 689, and the
the Egyptians accompanied the statue of Serapis with that of an animal
with three heads, the middle one that of a lion, the one to the right,
of a dog, and that to the left, of a ravenous wolf; and that a serpent
was represented encircling it in its folds, with its head below the
right hand of the statue of the Deity. To this the Poet possibly
alludes, or else to the asp, which was common in the North of Egypt, and
perhaps, was looked upon as sacred. If so, it is probable that the word