other inconsistencies are as in the original. The author's spelling
has been maintained.
Some printed caracters could not be reproduce in this file and have
T. Bensley, Printer, Bolt Court, Fleet Street, London.
Unde hominum pecudumque genus, vitaeque volantum,
Et quae marmoreo fert monstra sub aequore pontus?
Igneus est illis vigor, & caelestis origo.
VIRG. AEn. VI. 728.
The Poem, which is here offered to the Public, does not pretend to
instruct by deep researches of reasoning; its aim is simply to amuse
by bringing distinctly to the imagination the beautiful and sublime
images of the operations of Nature in the order, as the Author
believes, in which the progressive course of time presented them.
The Deities of Egypt, and afterwards of Greece, and Rome, were derived
from men famous in those early times, as in the ages of hunting,
pasturage, and agriculture. The histories of some of their actions
recorded in Scripture, or celebrated in the heathen mythology, are
introduced, as the Author hopes, without impropriety into his account
of those remote periods of human society.
In the Eleusinian mysteries the philosophy of the works of Nature,
with the origin and progress of society, are believed to have been
taught by allegoric scenery explained by the Hierophant to the
initiated, which gave rise to the machinery of the following Poem.
Jan. 1, 1802.
fifth beginning 9. Invocation to Love 15. II. Bowers of Eden, Adam and
Eve 33. Temple of Nature 65. Time chained by Sculpture 75. Proteus
bound by Menelaus 83. Bowers of Pleasure 89. School of Venus 97. Court
of Pain 105. Den of Oblivion 113. Muse of Melancholy 121. Cave of
Trophonius 125. Shrine of Nature 129. Eleusinian Mysteries 137. III.
Morning 155. Procession of Virgins 159. Address to the Priestess 167.
Descent of Orpheus into Hell 185. IV. Urania 205. GOD the First Cause
Contraction, Life 235. Spontaneous Production of Minute Animals 247.
Irritation, Appetency 251. Life enlarges the Earth 265. Sensation,
Volition, Association 269. Scene in the Microscope; Mucor, Monas,
Vibrio, Vorticella, Proteus, Mite 281. V. Vegetables and Animals
improve by Reproduction 295. Have all arisen from Microscopic
Animalcules 303. Rocks of Shell and Coral 315. Islands and Continents
raised by Earthquakes 321. Emigration of Animals from the Sea 327.
Trapa 335. Tadpole, Musquito 343. Diodon, Lizard, Beaver, Lamprey,
Remora, Whale 351. Venus rising from the Sea, emblem of Organic Nature
from the Mud of the Nile 401. The Hierophant and Muse 421-450.
Impress'd on Nature by the GREAT FIRST CAUSE,
Say, MUSE! how rose from elemental strife
Organic forms, and kindled into life;
How Love and Sympathy with potent charm
Warm the cold heart, the lifted hand disarm;
Allure with pleasures, and alarm with pains,
And bind Society in golden chains.
Four past eventful Ages then recite,
The silken tissue of their joys disclose,
Swell with deep chords the murmur of their woes;
Their laws, their labours, and their loves proclaim,
And chant their virtues to the trump of Fame.
IMMORTAL LOVE! who ere the morn of Time,
On wings outstretch'd, o'er Chaos hung sublime;
Warm'd into life the bursting egg of Night,
And gave young Nature to admiring Light!--
YOU! whose wide arms, in soft embraces hurl'd
Whether immers'd in day, the Sun your throne,
You gird the planets in your silver zone;
Or warm, descending on ethereal wing,
The Earth's cold bosom with the beams of spring;
Press drop to drop, to atom atom bind,
Link sex to sex, or rivet mind to mind;
Attend my song!--With rosy lips rehearse,
And with your polish'd arrows write my verse!--
So shall my lines soft-rolling eyes engage,
The smiles of Beauty all my toils repay,
And youths and virgins chant the living lay.
By angels guarded, and by prophets sung,
Wav'd o'er the east in purple pride unfurl'd,
And rock'd the golden cradle of the World;
Four sparkling currents lav'd with wandering tides
Their velvet avenues, and flowery sides;
On sun-bright lawns unclad the Graces stray'd,
Till the fair Bride, forbidden shades among,
Heard unalarm'd the Tempter's serpent-tongue;
Eyed the sweet fruit, the mandate disobey'd,
And her fond Lord with sweeter smiles betray'd.
Conscious awhile with throbbing heart he strove,
Spread his wide arms, and barter'd life for love!--
Now rocks on rocks, in savage grandeur roll'd,
Steep above steep, the blasted plains infold;
The incumbent crags eternal tempest shrouds,
Round the firm base loud-howling whirlwinds blow,
And sands in burning eddies dance below.
possess Europe and a part of Asia and of Africa, appear to
have descended from one family; and to have had their origin
near the banks of the Mediterranean, as probably in Syria,
the site of Paradise, according to the Mosaic history. This
seems highly probable from the similarity of the structure of
the languages of these nations, and from their early
possession of similar religions, customs, and arts, as well
as from the most ancient histories extant. The two former of
these may be collected from Lord Monboddo's learned work on
the Origin of Language, and from Mr. Bryant's curious account
of Ancient Mythology.
The use of iron tools, of the bow and arrow, of earthen
vessels to boil water in, of wheels for carriages, and the
arts of cultivating wheat, of coagulating milk for cheese,
and of spinning vegetable fibres for clothing, have been
known in all European countries, as long as their histories
have existed; besides the similarity of the texture of their
languages, and of many words in them; thus the word sack is
Greek, saccus in Latin, sacco in Italian, sac in French, and
sack in English and German.
Other families of mankind, nevertheless, appear to have
arisen in other parts of the habitable earth, as the language
of the Chinese is said not to resemble those of this part of
the world in any respect. And the inhabitants of the islands
of the South-Sea had neither the use of iron tools nor of the
bow, nor of wheels, nor of spinning, nor had learned to
coagulate milk, or to boil water, though the domestication of
fire seems to have been the first great discovery that
distinguished mankind from the bestial inhabitants of the
Hence ye profane!--the warring winds exclude
Unhallow'd throngs, that press with footstep rude;
But court the Muse's train with milder skies,
And call with softer voice the good and wise.
--Charm'd at her touch the opening wall divides,
And rocks of crystal form the polish'd sides;
Through the bright arch the Loves and Graces tread,
Innocuous thunders murmuring o'er their head;                     60
Pair after pair, and tittering, as they pass,
View their fair features in the walls of glass;
Leave with impatient step the circling bourn,
And hear behind the closing rocks return.
HERE, high in air, unconscious of the storm.
Thy temple, NATURE, rears it's mystic form;
From earth to heav'n, unwrought by mortal toil,
Towers the vast fabric on the desert soil;
O'er many a league the ponderous domes extend.
And deep in earth the ribbed vaults descend;                      70
A thousand jasper steps with circling sweep
Lead the slow votary up the winding steep;
Ten thousand piers, now join'd and now aloof,
Bear on their branching arms the fretted roof.
Unnumber'd ailes connect unnumber'd halls,
And sacred symbols crowd the pictur'd walls;
With pencil rude forgotten days design,
And arts, or empires, live in every line.
While chain'd reluctant on the marble ground,
Indignant TIME reclines, by Sculpture bound;                      80
And sternly bending o'er a scroll unroll'd,
Inscribes the future with his style of gold.
--So erst, when PROTEUS on the briny shore,
New forms assum'd of eagle, pard, or boar;
The wise ATRIDES bound in sea-weed thongs
The changeful god amid his scaly throngs;
Till in deep tones his opening lips at last
Reluctant told the future and the past.
mankind, in the early ages of society, to the imitative arts
of painting, carving, statuary, and the casting of figures in
metals, seems to have preceded the discovery of letters; and
to have been used as a written language to convey
intelligence to their distant friends, or to transmit to
posterity the history of themselves, or of their discoveries.
Hence the origin of the hieroglyphic figures which crowded
the walls of the temples of antiquity; many of which may be
seen in the tablet of Isis in the works of Montfaucon; and
some of them are still used in the sciences of chemistry and
astronomy, as the characters for the metals and planets, and
that Proteus was the name of a hieroglyphic figure
representing Time; whose form was perpetually changing, and
who could discover the past events of the world, and predict
the future. Herodotus does not doubt but that Proteus was an
Egyptian king or deity; and Orpheus calls him the principle
of all things, and the most ancient of the gods; and adds,
that he keeps the keys of Nature, _Danet's Dict._, all which
HERE o'er piazza'd courts, and long arcades,
The bowers of PLEASURE root their waving shades;                  90
Shed o'er the pansied moss a checker'd gloom,
Bend with new fruits, with flow'rs successive bloom.
Pleas'd, their light limbs on beds of roses press'd,
In slight undress recumbent Beauties rest;
On tiptoe steps surrounding Graces move,
And gay Desires expand their wings above.
HERE young DIONE arms her quiver'd Loves,
Schools her bright Nymphs, and practises her doves;
Calls round her laughing eyes in playful turns,
The glance that lightens, and the smile that burns;              100
Her dimpling cheeks with transient blushes dies,
Heaves her white bosom with seductive sighs;
Or moulds with rosy lips the magic words,
That bind the heart in adamantine cords.
Behind in twilight gloom with scowling mien
The demon PAIN, convokes his court unseen;
Whips, fetters, flames, pourtray'd on sculptur'd stone,
In dread festoons, adorn his ebon throne;
Each side a cohort of diseases stands,
And shudd'ring Fever leads the ghastly bands;                    110
O'er all Despair expands his raven wings,
And guilt-stain'd Conscience darts a thousand stings.
Deep-whelm'd beneath, in vast sepulchral caves,
OBLIVION dwells amid unlabell'd graves;
The storied tomb, the laurell'd bust o'erturns,
And shakes their ashes from the mould'ring urns.--
No vernal zephyr breathes, no sunbeams cheer,
Nor song, nor simper, ever enters here;
O'er the green floor, and round the dew-damp wall,
The slimy snail, and bloated lizard crawl;                       120
While on white heaps of intermingled bones
The muse of MELANCHOLY sits and moans;
Showers her cold tears o'er Beauty's early wreck,
Spreads her pale arms, and bends her marble neck.
So in rude rocks, beside the AEgean wave,
TROPHONIUS scoop'd his sorrow-sacred cave;
Unbarr'd to pilgrim feet the brazen door,
And the sad sage returning smil'd no more.
that prophecies of evil events were uttered from the cave of
Trophonius; but the allegorical story, that whoever entered
this cavern were never again seen to smile, seems to have
been designed to warn the contemplative from considering too
much the dark side of nature. Thus an ancient poet is said to
have written a poem on the miseries of the world, and to have
thence become so unhappy as to destroy himself. When we
reflect on the perpetual destruction of organic life, we
should also recollect, that it is perpetually renewed in
other forms by the same materials, and thus the sum total of
the happiness of the world continues undiminished; and that a
philosopher may thus smile again on turning his eyes from the
SHRIN'D in the midst majestic NATURE stands,
Extends o'er earth and sea her hundred hands;                    130
Tower upon tower her beamy forehead crests,
And births unnumber'd milk her hundred breasts;
Drawn round her brows a lucid veil depends,
O'er her fine waist the purfled woof descends;
Her stately limbs the gather'd folds surround,
And spread their golden selvage on the ground.
mysteries were invented in Egypt, and afterwards transferred
into Greece along with most of the other early arts and
religions of Europe. They seem to have consisted of scenical
representations of the philosophy and religion of those
times, which had previously been painted in hieroglyphic
figures to perpetuate them before the discovery of letters;
and are well explained in Dr. Warburton's divine legation of
Moses; who believes with great probability, that Virgil in
the sixth book of the AEneid has described a part of these
mysteries in his account of the Elysian fields.
In the first part of this scenery was represented Death, and
the destruction of all things; as mentioned in the note on
the Portland Vase in the Botanic Garden. Next the marriage of
Cupid and Psyche seems to have shown the reproduction of
living nature; and afterwards the procession of torches,
which is said to have constituted a part of the mysteries,
probably signified the return of light, and the resuscitation
of all things.
Lastly, the histories of illustrious persons of the early
ages seem to have been enacted; who were first represented by
hieroglyphic figures, and afterwards became the gods and
goddesses of Egypt, Greece, and Rome. Might not such a
dignified pantomime be contrived, even in this age, as might
strike the spectators with awe, and at the same time explain
many philosophical truths by adapted imagery, and thus both
From this first altar fam'd ELEUSIS stole
Her secret symbols and her mystic scroll;
With pious fraud in after ages rear'd
Her gorgeous temple, and the gods rever'd.                       140
--First in dim pomp before the astonish'd throng,
Silence, and Night, and Chaos, stalk'd along;
Dread scenes of Death, in nodding sables dress'd,
Froze the broad eye, and thrill'd the unbreathing breast.
Then the young Spring, with winged Zephyr, leads
The queen of Beauty to the blossom'd meads;
Charm'd in her train admiring Hymen moves,
And tiptoe Graces hand in hand with Loves.
Next, while on pausing step the masked mimes
Enact the triumphs of forgotten times,                           150
Conceal from vulgar throngs the mystic truth,
Or charm with Wisdom's lore the initiate youth;
Each shifting scene, some patriot hero trod,
Some sainted beauty, or some saviour god.
III. Now rose in purple pomp the breezy dawn,
And crimson dew-drops trembled on the lawn;
Blaz'd high in air the temple's golden vanes,
And dancing shadows veer'd upon the plains.--
Long trains of virgins from the sacred grove,
Pair after pair, in bright procession move,                      160
With flower-fill'd baskets round the altar throng,
Or swing their censers, as they wind along.
The fair URANIA leads the blushing bands,
Presents their offerings with unsullied hands;
Pleas'd to their dazzled eyes in part unshrouds
The goddess-form;--the rest is hid in clouds.
"PRIESTESS OF NATURE! while with pious awe
Thy votary bends, the mystic veil withdraw;
Charm after charm, succession bright, display,
And give the GODDESS to adoring day!                             170
So kneeling realms shall own the Power divine,
And heaven and earth pour incense on her shrine.
"Oh grant the MUSE with pausing step to press
Each sun-bright avenue, and green recess;
Led by thy hand survey the trophied walls,
The statued galleries, and the pictur'd halls;
Scan the proud pyramid, and arch sublime,
Earth-canker'd urn, medallion green with time,
Stern busts of Gods, with helmed heroes mix'd,
And Beauty's radiant forms, that smile betwixt.                  180
painting has appeared in the early state of all societies
before the invention of the alphabet. Thus when the Spanish
adventurers, under Cortez, invaded America, intelligence of
their debarkation and movements was daily transmitted to
Montezuma, by drawings, which corresponded with the Egyptian
hieroglyphics. The antiquity of statuary appears from the
Memnon and sphinxes of Egypt; that of casting figures in
metals from the golden calf of Aaron; and that of carving in
wood from the idols or household gods, which Rachel stole
from her father Laban, and hid beneath her garments as she
"Waked by thy voice, transmuted by thy wand,
Their lips shall open, and their arms expand;
The love-lost lady, and the warrior slain,
Leap from their tombs, and sigh or fight again.
--So when ill-fated ORPHEUS tuned to woe
His potent lyre, and sought the realms below;
Charm'd into life unreal forms respir'd,
And list'ning shades the dulcet notes admir'd.--
"LOVE led the Sage through Death's tremendous porch,
Cheer'd with his smile, and lighted with his torch;--            190
Hell's triple Dog his playful jaws expands,
Fawns round the GOD, and licks his baby hands;
In wondering groups the shadowy nations throng,
And sigh or simper, as he steps along;
Sad swains, and nymphs forlorn, on Lethe's brink,
Hug their past sorrows, and refuse to drink;
Night's dazzled Empress feels the golden flame
Play round her breast, and melt her frozen frame;
Charms with soft words, and sooths with amorous wiles,
Her iron-hearted Lord,--and PLUTO smiles.--                      200
His trembling Bride the Bard triumphant led
From the pale mansions of the astonish'd dead;
Gave the fair phantom to admiring light,--
Ah, soon again to tread irremeable night!"
taken from the figures on the Barbarini, or Portland Vase,
where Eros, or Divine Love, with his torch precedes the manes
through the gates of Death, and reverting his smiling
from a painting of the descent of Orpheus, by a celebrated
IV. HER snow-white arm, indulgent to my song,
Waves the fair Hierophant, and moves along.--
High plumes, that bending shade her amber hair,
Nod, as she steps, their silver leaves in air;
Bright chains of pearl, with golden buckles brac'd,
Clasp her white neck, and zone her slender waist;                210
Thin folds of silk in soft meanders wind
Down her fine form, and undulate behind;
The purple border, on the pavement roll'd,
Swells in the gale, and spreads its fringe of gold.
"FIRST, if you can, celestial Guide! disclose
From what fair fountain mortal life arose,
Whence the fine nerve to move and feel assign'd,
Contractile fibre, and ethereal mind:
"How Love and Sympathy the bosom warm,
Allure with pleasure, and with pain alarm,                       220
With soft affections weave the social plan,
And charm the listening Savage into Man."
"GOD THE FIRST CAUSE!--in this terrene abode
Young Nature lisps, she is the child of GOD.
From embryon births her changeful forms improve,
Grow, as they live, and strengthen as they move.
A Jove principium, musae! Jovis omnia plena.
In him we live, and move, and have our being.
production and increase of the strata of limestone from the
shells of aquatic animals; and of all those incumbent on them
from the recrements of vegetables and of terrestrial animals,
are now well understood from our improved knowledge of
geology; and show, that the solid parts of the globe are
gradually enlarging, and consequently that it is young; as
the fluid parts are not yet all converted into solid ones.
Add to this, that some parts of the earth and its inhabitants
appear younger than others; thus the greater height of the
mountains of America seems to show that continent to be less
ancient than Europe, Asia, and Africa; as their summits have
been less washed away, and the wild animals of America, as
the tigers and crocodiles, are said to be less perfect in
respect to their size and strength; which would show them to
be still in a state of infancy, or of progressive
improvement. Lastly, the progress of mankind in arts and
sciences, which continues slowly to extend, and to increase,
seems to evince the youth of human society; whilst the
unchanging state of the societies of some insects, as of the
bee, wasp, and ant, which is usually ascribed to instinct,
seems to evince the longer existence, and greater maturity of
those societies. The juvenility of the earth shows, that it
has had a beginning or birth, and is a strong natural
argument evincing the existence of a cause of its production,
"Ere Time began, from flaming Chaos hurl'd
Rose the bright spheres, which form the circling world;
Earths from each sun with quick explosions burst,
And second planets issued from the first.                        230
Then, whilst the sea at their coeval birth,
Surge over surge, involv'd the shoreless earth;
Nurs'd by warm sun-beams in primeval caves
Organic Life began beneath the waves.
"First HEAT from chemic dissolution springs,
And gives to matter its eccentric wings;
With strong REPULSION parts the exploding mass,
Melts into lymph, or kindles into gas.
ATTRACTION next, as earth or air subsides,
The ponderous atoms from the light divides,                      240
Approaching parts with quick embrace combines,
Swells into spheres, and lengthens into lines.
Last, as fine goads the gluten-threads excite,
Cords grapple cords, and webs with webs unite;
And quick CONTRACTION with ethereal flame
Lights into life the fibre-woven frame.--
Hence without parent by spontaneous birth
Rise the first specks of animated earth;
From Nature's womb the plant or insect swims,
And buds or breathes, with microscopic limbs.                    250
heat is an ethereal fluid, in which all things are immersed,
and which constitutes the general power of repulsion; as