CATALOGUE OF POPE'S COLLECTED EDITIONS OF HIS WORKS         vii
POPE'S MEMORIAL LIST OF RELATIONS AND FRIENDS                ix
ADVERTISEMENT OF WARBURTON TO HIS EDITION OF POPE'S WORKS    xi
INTRODUCTION                                                 xv
The Works of Mr. ALEXANDER POPE. London: Printed by W.
BOWYER for BERNARD LINTOT, between the Temple Gates, 1717.
This volume consists of all the acknowledged poems which Pope had
hitherto published, with the addition of some new pieces.
The Works of Mr. ALEXANDER POPE. Volume ii. London: Printed
by J. WRIGHT, for LAWTON GILLIVER, at Homer's Head in Fleet
Street, 1735. 4to and folio.
The volume of 1735 contains, with a few exceptions, the poems which Pope
had printed since 1717. The pages of each group of pieces--Epistles,
Satires, Epitaphs, etc.--are numbered separately, and there are other
irregularities in the numbers, arising from a change in the order of the
Moral Essays after the sheets were struck off.
Letters of Mr. ALEXANDER POPE, and Several of his friends.
London: Printed by J. WRIGHT for J. KNAPTON in Ludgate
Street, L. GILLIVER in Fleet Street, J. BRINDLEY in New Bond
Street, and R. DODSLEY in Pall-Mall, 1737. 4to and folio.
This is Pope's first avowed edition of his letters. A half-title, "The
Works of Mr. Alexander Pope in Prose," precedes the title-page.
The Works of Mr. ALEXANDER POPE, in Prose. Vol. ii. London:
Printed for J. and P. KNAPTON, C. BATHURST, and R. DODSLEY,
The half-title is more precise: "The Works of Mr. Alexander Pope, in
Prose. Vol. ii. Containing the rest of his Letters, with the Memoirs of
Scriblerus, never before printed; and other Tracts written either
singly, or in conjunction with his friends. Now first collected
together." The letters are the Swift correspondence, and they are in a
different type from the rest of the book. The numbers of the pages are
very irregular, and show that the contents and arrangement of the volume
had been greatly altered from some previous impression. The folio copies
of the two volumes of poetry, and the two of prose, are merely the
quarto text portioned out into longer pages, without a single leaf being
the matter was put into the folio size.
The Works of ALEXANDER POPE, ESQ.; vol. i. with explanatory
Notes and Additions never before printed. London: Printed
for B. LINTOT, 1736. Small 8vo.
This is the first volume of an edition which extended to nine volumes,
and which from the want of uniformity in the title-pages, the dates, and
of Pope's works belonged to different proprietors, and they at last
agreed to print their respective shares in small octavo, that the
several parts united might form a complete set. Each proprietor
commenced printing his particular section of the octavos when the
previous sizes he had on hand were sold, and thus it happened that the
second volume of the edition came out in 1735 before the first, which
was published in 1736. The series was not finished till 1742, when the
fourth book of the Dunciad was added to the Poems, and the Swift
the later editions occasionally differ slightly from their predecessors.
The Poems and Letters of Pope are more complete in the octavos than in
the quartos, but the octavos, on the other hand, omit all the prose
works except the Letters, and the Memoirs of Scriblerus, and octavos and
quartos combined are imperfect in comparison with the editions which
have been published since Pope's death.
Quo desiderio veteres revocamus amores
Atque olim amissas flemus amicitias.
_Catullus._
Anno 1700, Maji primo, obit, semper venerandus, poetarum princeps,
Anno 1708, mens. Aprili, obiit Gulielmus Walsh, criticus sagax, amicus
et vir bonus, aet. 49.
Anno 1710, Jan. 24, Avita mea piissimae mem., Eliz. Turner, migravit in
coelum, annum agens 74.
Anno 1710, mens. Aprili, Tho. Betterton, Roscius sui temporis, exit
omnium cum plausu bonorum, aet. 74.
Anno 1712, mens. Januario, decessit vir facetissimus, juventutis meae
deliciae, Antonius Englefleld, aet. 75.
Anno 1718, obit Tho. Parnell, poetica laude, et moribus suavissimis
insignis.
Anno 1715, mens. Martio, decessit Gul. Wycherley, poeta morum scientia
clarus, ille meos primus qui habebat amores, aet. 75.
Anno 1716, mens. Decemb. obit Gulielmus Trumbull, olim Regi Gul. a
secretis, annum agens 75. Amicus meus humanissimus a juvenilibus annis.
Pater meus, Alex. Pope, omnibus bonis moribus praeditus obit, an. 1717.
Simon Harcourt, filius, obit, mens. Junio 1720, Lutet. Parisior. Quem
sequitur Pater, olim M. Britann. Cancellar., mense Julio 1727.
Jacobus Craggs R.M.B. a secretis, natura generosus et ingenuus, amicus
animosus, charissim. memor., e vita exc. Feb. 1720/1.
Robertus Oxoniae Comes, mihi perfamiliaris et jucundus, fortiter obit,
Jo. Sheffield, Buckinghamiae Dux, mihi lenis et amicissimus, fato functus
est Feb. 1720/1 aet. 73.
Nutrix mea fidelissima M. Beech, obiit 5 Novem. 1725, aet. 77.
Robertus Digby, ex Patre antiquis praeditus moribus, e vita migravit,
Apr. 1726.
Edwardus Blunt, vir amicissimus obit, Aug. 1726.
Anno 1728/9, Jan. 20, aet. 57, mortuus est Gulielmus Congreve, poeta,
eximius, vir comis, urbanus, et mihi perquam familiaris.
Elijah Fenton, vir probus, et poeta haud mediocris, decessit men. Julio
Francisc. Atterbury, Roffens Episcopus, vir omni scientia clarus,
animosus, ex Anglia exilio pulsus, an. 1723. Obiit Parisiis, mense Febr.
Joan. Gay, probitate morum et simplicitate insignis, socius peramabilis,
sub oculis meis mortuus est, Dec. 4, 1723, aet. 44.
Mater mea charissima, pientissima et optima, Editha Pope, obiit septima
die Junii 1733, annum implens nonagesimum tertium.
G. Garth, MD. homo candidus et poeta urbanus, obiit 1719.
Joan. Arbuthnot, MD. vir doctiss., probitate ac pietate insignis, obiit
Febr. 27, 1734/5, aet. 68.
Carolus Mordaunt. Com. Peterbor., vir insigniss. bellica virtute, ac
morum comitate, obiit Ulyssipont. anno aetatis 78, 1735, mense Octobris.
sale of Pope's books, for on the fly-leaf is written "E. Libris A.
acquaintance with him, marks his admiration by including him in this
Mr. Pope, in his last illness, amused himself, amidst the care of his
higher concerns, in preparing a corrected and complete edition of his
prevent any share of the offence they might occasion, from falling on
discharge of this trust, the public has here a complete edition of his
works, executed in such a manner, as, I am persuaded, would have been to
his satisfaction. The editor hath not, for the sake of profit, suffered
to be defrauded of their due honours by a vulgar or inelegant
impression; nor his memory to be disgraced by any pieces unworthy of his
talents or virtue. On the contrary, he hath, at a very great expense,
ornamented this edition with all the advantages which the best artists
If the public hath waited longer than the deference due to its generous
impatience for the author's writings should have suffered, it was owing
to a reason which the editor need not be ashamed to tell. It was his
regard to the family interests of his deceased friend. Mr. Pope, at his
death, had left large impressions of several parts of his works, unsold,
the property of which was adjudged to belong to his executors; and the
editor was willing they should have time to dispose of them to the best
advantage, before the publication of this edition (which hath been long
prepared) should put a stop to the sale. But it may be proper to be a
little more particular concerning the superiority of this edition above
all the preceding, so far as Mr. Pope himself was concerned. What the
editor hath done, the reader must collect for himself.
The first volume, and the original poems in the second, are here first
printed from a copy corrected throughout by the author himself, even to
hand, he delivered to the editor a little before his death. The juvenile
translations, in the other part of the second volume, it was never his
intention to bring into this edition of his works, on account of the
levity of some, the freedom of others, and the little importance of all.
But these being the property of other men, the editor had it not in his
power to follow the author's intention.
The third volume (all but the Essay on Man, which together with the
Essay on Criticism, the author, a little before his death, had corrected
and published in quarto, as a specimen of his projected edition,) was
printed by him in his last illness, but never published, in the manner
it is now given. The disposition of the Epistle on the Characters of Men
is quite altered; that on the Characters of Women much enlarged; and the
Epistles on Riches and Taste corrected and improved. To these advantages
of the third volume must be added a great number of fine verses, taken
from the author's manuscript copies of these poems, communicated by him
for this purpose to the editor. These, the author, when he first
published the poems to which they belong, thought proper, for various
reasons, to omit. Some, from the manuscript copy of the Essay on Man,
which tended to discredit fate, and to recommend the moral government of
God, had, by the editor's advice, been restored to their places in the
sort, from his manuscript copy of the other Ethic Epistles, are here
inserted at the bottom of the page, under the title of Variations.
The fourth volume contains the Satires, with their Prologue,--the
Epistle to Dr. Arbuthnot; and Epilogue,--the two poems intitled
MDCCXXXVIII. The Prologue and Epilogue are here given with the like
advantages as the Ethic Epistles in the foregoing volume, that is to
say, with the Variations, or additional verses from the author's
manuscripts. The Epilogue to the Satires is likewise inriched with many
and large notes, now first printed from the author's own manuscript.
The fifth volume contains a correcter and completer edition of the
Dunciad than hath been hitherto published, of which, at present, I have
only this further to add, that it was at my request he laid the plan of
a fourth book. I often told him, it was pity so fine a poem should
remain disgraced by the meanness of its subject, the most insignificant
of all dunces,--bad rhymers and malevolent cavillers; that he ought to
raise and ennoble it by pointing his satire against the most pernicious
of all,--minute philosophers and free-thinkers. I imagined, too, it was
for the interests of religion to have it known, that so great a genius
had a due abhorrence of these pests of virtue and society. He came
readily into my opinion; but, at the same time, told me it would create
him many enemies. He was not mistaken, for though the terror of his pen
kept them for some time in respect, yet on his death they rose with
unrestrained fury in numerous coffee-house tales, and Grub Street
libels. The plan of this admirable satire was artfully contrived to
show, that the follies and defects of a fashionable education naturally
led to, and necessarily ended in, freethinking, with design to point out
the only remedy adequate to so destructive an evil. It was to advance
the same ends of virtue and religion, that the editor prevailed on him
to alter everything in his moral writings that might be suspected of
having the least glance towards fate or naturalism, and to add what was
proper to convince the world that he was warmly on the side of moral
government and a revealed will. And it would be great injustice to his
memory not to declare that he embraced these occasions with the most
unfeigned pleasure.
The sixth volume consists of Mr. Pope's miscellaneous pieces in verse
and prose. Amongst the verse several fine poems make now their first
appearance in his works. And of the prose, all that is good, and nothing
but what is exquisitely so, will be found in this edition.
The seventh, eighth, and ninth volumes consist entirely of his letters,
the more valuable, as they are the only true models which we, or perhaps
now made more complete by the addition of several new pieces. Yet,
show the editor's inducements, and the engagements he was under, to
intend the care of this edition) excepting these, I say, the rest are
all here published from the author's own printed, though not published
On the whole, the advantages of this edition, above the preceding, are
these,--that it is the first complete collection which has ever been
made of his original writings; that all his principal poems, of early or
later date, are here given to the public with his last corrections and
improvements; that a great number of his verses are here first printed
from the manuscript copies of his principal poems of later date; that
many new notes of the author are here added to his poems; and lastly,
that several pieces, both in prose and verse make now their first
appearance before the public.
The author's life deserves a just volume, and the editor intends to give
it. For to have been one of the first poets in the world is but his
second praise. He was in a higher class. He was one of the "noblest
more real virtue than, in very corrupt times, needing a satirist like
him, will sometimes fall to the share of multitudes. In this history of
critique on the nature, force, and extent of his genius, exemplified
from these writings; and a vindication of his moral character,
exemplified by his more distinguished virtues,--his filial piety, his
disinterested friendships, his reverence for the constitution of his
country, his love and admiration of virtue, and (what was the necessary
effect) his hatred and contempt of vice, his extensive charity to the
indigent, his warm benevolence to mankind, his supreme veneration of the
Deity, and above all his sincere belief of Revelation. Nor shall his
faults be concealed. It is not for the interests of his virtues that
they should. Nor indeed could they be concealed, if we were so disposed,
for they shine through his virtues, no man being more a dupe to the
be his panegyrist but his historian. And may I, when envy and calumny
have taken the same advantage of my absence (for, while I live, I will
freely trust it to my life to confute them) may I find a friend as
careful of my honest fame as I have been of his! Together with his
works, he hath bequeathed me his dunces. So that as the property is
transferred, I could wish they would now let his memory alone. The veil
which death draws over the good is so sacred, that to tear it, and with
sacrilegious hands, to throw dirt upon the shrine, gives scandal even to
barbarians. And though Rome permitted her slaves to calumniate her best
citizens on the day of triumph, yet the same petulancy at their funeral
may be malicious; but is rarely vindictive or ungenerous. It would abhor
all insults, on a writer dead, though it had borne with the ribaldry, or
even set the ribalds on work, when he was alive. And in this there is no
great harm, for he must have a strange impotency of mind indeed whom
such miserable scribblers can disturb or ruffle. Of all that gross
Beotian phalanx who have written scurrilously against the editor, he
knows not so much as one whom a writer of reputation would not wish to
have his enemy, or whom a man of honour would not be ashamed to own for
knows little of the particulars of their defamation. To his authorship
they are heartily welcome. But if any of them have been so far abandoned
by truth as to attack his moral character in any respect whatsoever, to
all and every one of these and their abettors, he gives the lie in form,
and in the words of honest Father Valerian, _mentiris impudentissime_.
willing to see the end of all further care about me or my works. I would
rest for the one in a full resignation of my being to be disposed of by
the Father of all mercy; and for the other (though indeed a trifle, yet
a trifle may be some example) I would commit them to the candour of a
sensible and reflecting judge, rather than to the malice of every
short-sighted and malevolent critic, or inadvertent and censorious
reader. And no hand can set them in so good a light," &c.--_Let. cxx._
property of all such of my works already printed as he hath written or
shall write commentaries or notes upon, and which I have not otherwise
disposed of or alienated; and as he shall publish without future
Warburton to the public, soliciting them to increase the value of the
not extraordinary. The outlay upon the edition, for which Warburton
takes credit as for a munificent act, was a common-place commercial
Warburton gives of the novelties in his edition is from first to last
letters, or what is more likely, he was unable to taste their charm.
Their delicate graces, and native liveliness, would have been lost upon
the man who thought that Pope's artificial epistles were "true models of
unaccountable. Every line of them had been published twice over by Pope
in his lifetime, and all but two or three pages, had been published
A wit's a feather, and a chief's a rod,
future edition of his works, so as to make a part of them.--WARBURTON.
The Life which Warburton promised with such solemn pomp was never
written and he was content to assist Ruffhead in his feeble
his credulous belief in "the specious appearance of virtue," which was a
sarcasm directed against those friends of Pope who were the enemies of
Pope's funeral, which took place seven years before. He insisted that
because Pope was dead no one should ever again question his title to be
called "good." Neither Pope nor Warburton was accustomed to spare dead
men, and the claim for exemption was specially inconsistent in the
preface to works which were full of bitter attacks upon both living and
dead. Warburton was to go on circulating Pope's venom, and any victim
who retaliated was to be pronounced "sacrilegious," "a scandal even to
host of paradoxical notions, his opponents, if we are to trust his
In his will, dated December 12, 1743, not quite six months before he
died, Pope bequeathed his printed works to Warburton, on condition that
he published them without "future alterations." Warburton states that
the object of the proviso was to relieve him from the obloquy he might
incur by reproducing offensive strokes of satire. A few slight
alterations which had not the sanction of any prior edition were
nevertheless introduced by Warburton into some of the poems, and he
announced on the title-page and in the preface, that they were taken
from a corrected copy delivered to him by Pope. Mr. Croker mistrusted
the genuineness of the "alterations," and he intended to reject the text
of Warburton, and adopt in the main the text of the last octavo edition
which had appeared during the lifetime of the poet. The honour of
Warburton is not above suspicion, but Mr. Croker was misled by erroneous
inferences when he accused him of tampering with the text, and falsely
pleading the authority of "a copy corrected by the author himself."
Fantastic in his conceptions, violent in his animosities, hasty and
imperious in the expression of his opinions, Warburton sometimes
repented his rashness, and cancelled numerous leaves in his Shakespeare
and Pope after the volumes were printed off. Mr. Kilvert, who edited his
Literary Remains, found among his papers a cancelled leaf of the Pope,
containing the commencement of the Prologue to the Satires. On the first
page Warburton had inserted among the "Variations" a couplet which he
said was copied from the manuscript of Pope:
And now vile poets rise before the light,
And walk, like Margaret's ghost, at dead of night.
The allusion was to the ballad of William and Margaret, written by
Mallet. He was the ally of Pope and Bolingbroke, and when Pope was dead
he was employed by Bolingbroke to blast the memory of their former
opportunity of appending a bitter note upon Mallet, whom he accused of
"arraigning his dead patron for a cheat," and the leaf was cancelled to
get rid of both note and variation. Mr. Croker believed that Warburton
"forged" the variation to gratify his spleen against Mallet, whom he
detested, and that before the volume was published "either his own
conscience, or some prudent friend, suggested that such manifest fraud
would not be tolerated." The conjecture was unfounded. Pope presented
several of his manuscripts to the son of Jonathan Richardson, the
portrait-painter, for his trouble in collating them with the printed
text. Richardson's interlined copy of the first quarto volume of Pope's
poetry passed into the hands of Malone, and was ultimately bought by Mr.
Croker. The manuscripts which Richardson possessed in the handwriting of
Pope were purchased by Dr. Chauncey, and are still the property of his
descendants. Among them is the Prologue to the Satires, and it contains
the couplet Mr. Croker believed to have been forged. In every instance
where the manuscripts exist the variations printed by Warburton are
found to be authentic.
The inference of Mr. Croker from the variations must be reversed. They
do not invalidate, but attest, the fidelity of Warburton, and the
"alterations" in the text of the poems must pass unchallenged unless
there is some direct proof of their inaccuracy. The arguments, on the
contrary, are altogether in their favour. Four printed pages of the
first Moral Essay, with the corrections in manuscript, were discovered
by Mr. Kilvert among Warburton's papers. "Some of the words," says Mr.
Croker, "are so neatly written as to leave a strong impression on my eye
of their being Pope's; other portions of the manuscript are more like
Warburton's looser hand." The faint doubt expressed by Mr. Croker would
hardly have arisen if his suspicion had not been previously awakened,
for the corrections are all indubitably in the handwriting of the poet.
Nor was the manuscript in this instance the guide of Warburton. He
followed a copy of the Moral Essays printed by Pope in his last illness,
though never published. "Warburton has the propriety of it as you know,"
wrote Bolingbroke to Lord Marchmont, one of the executors; "alter it he
Croker. The executors had access to Pope's latest printed version of the
Moral Essays, which was Warburton's avowed authority, and he could not
alter a single word without certain detection, and the consequent
forfeiture of his legacy. He was alive to the risk. A portion of Pope's
revised edition of his poetical works was passing through the press at
the time of his death, and Warburton directed the printer to give the
sheets, when the executors inquired for them, to their colleague the
celebrated Murray, who was afterwards Lord Mansfield, adding, "Pray
will bound the editor to be faithful to his trust, under a penalty of
necessity of having the voucher of the poet's handwriting for the
minutest departure from the previous text in such of the proofs as had
not received Pope's final imprimatur. A more ample guarantee could not
be desired for the authenticity of the particulars in which Warburton's
text differs from the printed copies superintended by Pope. All the
displaced readings, which are not utterly insignificant, are preserved
in the notes to the present edition, as well as numerous unpublished
variations, which are taken from the manuscripts of Pope, or the
transcripts of Richardson.
The text of Pope's poems is more easily settled than elucidated. No
other poet so near to our own time presents equal difficulties. His
satires abound in uncertain allusions, and controverted topics which
require a large amount of illustration and discussion. His philosophy
was not understood by himself, and it is a study to disentangle his
confused arguments, and interpret his doubtful language. He often
expressed his opinions with wilful ambiguity, took refuge in
equivocations, or had recourse to falsehoods, and we are constantly
forced upon perplexing investigations to recover the truth he
endeavoured to conceal. Fortunately his best poems and choicest passages
are least incumbered with puzzling questions, and his obscurities have
not much interfered with his popularity because the mass of readers are
content to enjoy the beauties and leave the enigmas unsolved.
The number and eminence of the commentators on Pope, the diversity of
their attainments, and the extent of their annotations appear to promise
all the help which knowledge, acuteness, and taste could supply. The
result is far below what might reasonably have been anticipated.
Warburton, Pope's first editor, had a vigorous understanding, and
possessed the enormous advantage that he carried on the work in concert
with the poet, and could ask the explanation of every difficulty. A
diseased ambition rendered his talents and opportunities useless.
Without originality he aspired to be original, and imagined that to
fabricate hollow paradoxes, and torture language into undesigned
meanings was the surest evidence of a fertile, penetrating genius. He
employed his sagacity less to discover than to distort the ideas of his
author, and seems to have thought that the more he deviated from the
obvious sense the greater would be his fame for inventive power. He has
left no worse specimen of his perverse propensity than the spurious
fancies, and idle refinements he fathered upon Pope. They are among his
baldest paradoxes, are conveyed in his heaviest style, and are supported
by his feeblest sophistry. His lifeless and verbose conceits soon
provoke by their falsity, and fatigue by their ponderousness. Lord
Marchmont said laughingly to Pope that "he must be the vainest man
alive, and must want to show posterity what a quantity of dulness he
exuberant self-sufficiency of Warburton deluded him into the belief that
the text derived its principal lustre from the commentary. He selected
for the frontispiece to his edition a monument on which were hung
medallions of himself and the poet, and Blakey, the draughtsman, told
Burke that "it was by Warburton's particular desire that he made him the
principal figure, and Pope only secondary, and that the light, contrary
to the rules of art, goes upwards from Warburton to Pope." A gentleman
remarked, when Burke related the anecdote, that they were drawn looking
always prevailed. The clumsy inventions of Warburton had not the
semblance of plausibility, and scarce anybody except his shadow, and
fulsome echo, Bishop Hurd, ever doubted that the text and commentary
Proud of his dreary paradoxes, Warburton scorned the humble office of
furnishing useful information. Pope had said, in his Imitations of
Horace, that because three ladies liked a luckless play, a spendthrift
Warburton the following note:--"The common reader, I am sensible, will
be always more solicitous about the names of these three ladies, the
unlucky play, and every other circumstance that attended this piece of
gallantry, than for the explanation of our author's sense, or the
illustration of his poetry, even where he is most moral and sublime. But
had it been in Mr. Pope's purpose to indulge so impertinent a curiosity,
he had sought elsewhere for a commentator on his writings. Which defect
in these notes, the periodical scribblers, however, have been stupid and
praiseworthy when his motive was respect for private feelings. His
general neglect to clear up the allusions in Pope's poems did not admit
of this apology, and in default of a better defence he called his
critics "stupid and shameless." His habit when reasons failed him was to
supply their place with abuse.
The edition of Warburton was published in 1751, and no attempt was made
to supersede it till Gilbert Wakefield commenced a new edition in 1794.
He was "labouring," he says, "for a subsistence," and the cost of the
work, which was printed at his own expense, obliged him to bring out a
volume at a time. Before the first volume was quite through the press he
learned that Joseph Warton was engaged on a similar undertaking. Warton
had the support of the London booksellers, and the edition of Wakefield
ended with his opening volume. The world did not lose the benefit of his
annotations. He published in 1796 his Observations on Pope, which
consist of notes on the remaining poems, and of supplemental notes to
the poems he had previously edited. Wakefield said that an "inculpable
perfection pervaded the whole body of Pope's compositions," and in the
extravagance of his admiration he overlaid the volume of his unfinished
edition with weak rhapsodies which masked the useful part of his
labours. He restrained his eulogistic excesses in his Observations, and
kept more closely to his main design of tracing Pope's "imitations of
his predecessors." All persons tolerably read in poetry could perceive
that the obligations Pope acknowledged in his notes were but a fraction
of the whole, and in 1740, Bowyer, the printer, with the assistance of
Mr. Clarke, a clergyman, commenced a collection of parallel passages.
From the letters of Clarke to Bowyer it appears that Pope was annoyed.
Bowyer profited by his irritation, and offered to treat with him. "I
think," wrote Clarke in 1742, "you buy his friendship cheap with a whole
hecatomb of notes, essays, illustrations, and the mob of
result is revealed in the fact that Bowyer shortly afterwards became
Pope's printer. The sensitiveness which was disturbed at the gleanings
of Bowyer would have shuddered at the abundant harvest of Wakefield. He
himself had no intention of depreciating the merits of Pope. He only
wished to illustrate a favourite author. Many of the parallelisms are
too slight to be applicable, or they are common phrases the property of
every Englishman. A vast number remain which are a curious exhibition of
Pope's patience and skill in the art of poetical mosaic, and of the
large amount of borrowed beauties he intermixed with his undoubted
originality. The interpretation of the text, though subordinate with
Wakefield, was not neglected by him. He and a friend who assisted him,
Dr. William Bennet, Bishop of Cloyne, have explained more allusions than
all the other commentators, and the least known and appreciated of the
editors of Pope is the man who has done the most for his author.
The edition of Warton appeared in 1797. "His reason," he says in his
preface, "for undertaking the work was the universal complaint that Dr.
Warburton had disfigured and disgraced his edition with many forced and
far-sought interpretations, totally unsupported by the passages which
they were brought to elucidate." Warton had the stimulus of a second
motive. He published in 1756 the first volume of his Essay on Pope, and
his criticisms were roughly attacked in many passages of Ruffhead's Life
of the poet, which was prompted and partly written by Warburton. While
Warburton lived Warton did not venture to retaliate. The thirty years
which intervened had not extinguished his resentment, and he seized the
opportunity to revenge the ancient grudge. His consciousness of
Warburton's defects did not keep Warton from repeating the error of
filling page upon page with irrelevant matter. His Essay on Pope had
been a receptacle for his store of miscellaneous reading, and in a
separate work there was no objection to a medley of anecdote and
criticism. He was seventy-five when he published his edition of Pope,
and to save himself trouble he apportioned out the old farrago in notes.
Profuse in digressions, he is sparing of needful explanations. His turn
was for the lighter portions of criticism and biography, and most of his
apposite remarks are critical opinions. They are often just, but never
profound, for he had neither fervid feelings nor a robust understanding,
and his highest qualities are a fair poetical taste, and a tolerable
acquaintance with ancient and modern authors.
Bowles was a school-boy at Winchester when Warton was head-master, and
he intimated that this early connection was the cause of his being
employed to revise the next edition of Pope. It appeared in 1806. His
poetic sensibility was exquisite, and he was well-read, shrewd, and
candid. His failing was a hurry of mind which disqualified him for a
painstaking commentator. He was content to jot down in a careless,
colloquial style the off-hand thoughts of his quick and cultivated
intellect, and he did not add much to the scanty explanations of Warton
and Warburton. The chief merit of his edition is his excellent literary
criticism, which is truer, deeper, and more refined than that of his old
Winchester master. The estimate Bowles formed of the poetry and
character of Pope was allowed to pass unchallenged for thirteen years,
when some remarks of Campbell, in his Specimens of British Poets,
commenced a controversy which lasted from 1819 to 1826. In the series of
pamphlets he published to vindicate his opinions, Bowles exhibited his
wonted acuteness, courage, and negligence. With all his slips in minor
points the fresh facts which have come to light have more than confirmed
his view of Pope's moral obliquities, and in the discussion on the
principles of poetry he reduced the whole of his adversaries to silence.
He and Hazlitt were the only persons among the disputants, eminent or
obscure, who showed any real comprehension of the subject.
The next edition of Pope, justly considered by Mr. Croker to be the
worst, came out in 1824, and was superintended by Roscoe, the author of
the Life of Lorenzo de Medici, and Leo X. He barely contributed a single
illustrative note, his criticisms are platitudes, and his vindications
of Pope a tissue of blunders. He was misled by his credulous faith in
his hero, by the rashness with which he imposed his own guesses for
facts, and above all by his want of penetration and research. His
half-knowledge was worse than ignorance. A few of his multitudinous
errors were exposed by Bowles whom he had attacked. Roscoe replied in a
feeble, disingenuous pamphlet, which drew from Bowles his taunting and
crushing retort, Lessons in Criticism to William Roscoe, Esq. This ended
the Pope controversy.
The faults of plan and execution in the editions of Warburton, Warton,
Bowles, and Roscoe stand out in strong relief, and Mr. Croker resolved,
as far as possible, to correct the mistakes, retrench the
superfluities, and supply the omissions. Warton and Bowles dismissed a
large proportion of the barren, oppressive commentaries of Warburton.
Roscoe put back the whole of the bulky excrescence. Most of it had been
adopted by Pope, and to relieve the text, without excluding
interpretations sanctioned by the poet, Mr. Croker determined to print
the pedantic lumber in appendixes. The notes of the other editors rested
upon their intrinsic merits, and he intended to sift out the surplusage,
and only retain what was pertinent. To curtail is easy. The difficulty
was to clear up the many obscurities which remained, and Mr. Croker was
anxious to furnish his share of explanation, though he was convinced
that numerous contemporary allusions would always baffle curiosity. His
chief attention was directed to the satires, and he continued for many
years to pursue his investigations, and accumulate materials. His busy
life was succeeded by failing health, and he died before he had prepared
his notes for the press. The results of his research have luckily all
been preserved, for his habit was to write them out in full at the time.
He was an acute and eager enquirer into political, personal, and social
history, and no man could have been more competent to bring to the
surface the under-current of forgotten circumstances.
I have kept to the plan sketched out by Mr. Croker. "A commentary," says
Johnson, "must arise from the fortuitous discoveries of many men in
devious walks of literature," and few poets have had more commentators
than Pope. I have borrowed whatever I met with in previous writers that
throw light upon his meaning, faults, and beauties, have cast aside what
was plainly inapplicable and erroneous, and have done what I could to
fill up deficiencies. My own notes will be recognised by the absence of
any signature; all other notes throughout the work have the names of
their authors attached, even when a note is by the same author as the
text. The extracts from Warton are sometimes taken from his Essay, and
both in his case and that of Bowles I have occasionally joined together
scattered fragments which were connected in their subject. The rest of
the arrangements will be understood at a glance.
The letters of Pope demand a more particular discussion. Estimated by
their intrinsic merits they would call for little notice. "He laboured
them," says Horace Walpole, "as much as the Essay on Man, and as they
were written to everybody they do not look as if they had been written
happily exposed. The chief importance of the correspondence is in its
relation to the morality of Pope, and the fame of men whose reputation
is involved in the question of his uprightness. His real nature has
always been hotly debated. "His detractors," says De Quincey, "fancy
that in his character a basis of ignoble qualities was here and there
slightly relieved by a few shining spots; we, on the contrary, believe
that in Pope lay a disposition radically noble and generous, clouded and
overshadowed by superficial foibles; or, to adopt the distinction of
Shakespeare, they see nothing but 'dust a little gilt,' and we 'gold a
champions judge him by his own representations. His accusers hold that
his professions were hypocritical, as when Lord Macaulay speaks of his
"spite and envy, thinly disguised by sentiments as benevolent and noble
charges brought against him are thickly scattered over his life, and
either the guilty appearances are deceptive, or we must admit that his
mind was essentially corrupt. His correspondence brings up the
ever-recurring enquiry, and we have to decide whether his letters are
not many of them fraudulent, and the circumstances attending their
publication a series of ignominious plots, infamous false accusations,
and impudent lies.
Every examination into the history of the letters was slight before Mr.
Dilke engaged in the laborious task. His familiarity with the books,
pamphlets, and periodicals of the time could not be exceeded, and his
doubts once awakened he accepted nothing upon trust. With an immense
amount of research and skill he proceeded to track Pope through his
tortuous courses. He laid bare the ramifications of the plot against
Curll, which was only known in a few of its prominent particulars. He
detected, what none of the editors and biographers had perceived, the
base manoeuvres and deceit which accompanied the publication of the
"Letters to and from Dr. Swift." He was originally put upon his
investigations by the manuscript collection of Pope's letters to Caryll,
and these revealed a new set of frauds in the evidence they supplied of
letters converted into a fictitious correspondence. His inclination was
to favour Pope whenever there was an opening for a liberal
interpretation, and it was not from hostility that he exposed the
net-work of fraud, and brought out the dark traits of a dishonourable
disposition with new and terrible force. He printed his discoveries in
his essays, I am compelled to adopt his conclusions. The evidence upon
which they rest is often circumstantial and intricate, and cannot be
followed to the end without steady attention, and some trial of
patience.
The letters of the poet which were first sent to the press were given by
Cromwell to his mistress, Elizabeth Thomas, who sold them in her
distress to Curll for ten guineas. She was a shameless woman, and boldly
justified her conduct. "Everyone," she said, "knows that the person to
whom a letter is addressed has the same right to dispose of it as he has
of goods purchased with his money." The right which originally belonged
to Cromwell, of publishing to the world whatever had been written to
him in the confidence of friendship, he had, by his gift, transferred to
herself; and thus it appeared that Cromwell had a right to be
treacherous to Pope, and Mrs. Thomas a right to be treacherous to both
Pope and Cromwell. With more reason she inferred that neither of them at
heart would be vexed at the proceeding. Cromwell, she urged, could not
be angry that the world should know "the professions of love, gratitude,
and veneration made him by so celebrated an author," and Pope could not
resent the exhibition of the "early pregnancy of his genius." "And yet,"
she continued, "had either of you been asked, common modesty would have
obliged you to refuse what you would not be displeased with if done
subsequent conduct, that this was the light in which the publication was
viewed by the poet, notwithstanding his assertion in a note to the
Dunciad, "that he was ashamed of the letters as very trivial things,
full not only of levities, but of wrong judgments of men and books, and
only excusable from the youth and inexperience of the writer." Mrs.
Thomas did him an incalculable injury, not by revealing his secrets, but
by flattering his vanity. The favourable reception of his correspondence
originated the desire to give some further specimens to the world, and
led him into the miserable series of falsehoods and frauds by which he
endeavoured to accomplish his design without seeming to be privy to it.
The letters to Cromwell were published in Curll's "Miscellanea," of
which the title-page says "Printed in the year 1727;" but the dedication
to the letters themselves is dated June, 1726, and it was in 1726 that
they appeared. The incidental and scanty notices of them at the time are
sufficient to indicate the impression they produced. Thompson, writing
in October to Aaron Hill, says that "though careless and uncorrected,
they are full of wit and gaiety." There may have been many who thought
that they did as much credit to the heart as to the head of the poet. "I
have read the collection of letters you mention," Fenton wrote to Broome
in September, 1726, "and was delighted with nothing more than that air
of sincerity, those professions of esteem and respect, and that
deference paid to his friend's judgment in poetry which I have sometimes
seen expressed to others, and I doubt not with the same cordial
affection. If they are read in that light, they will be very
entertaining and useful in the present age; but in the next, Cicero,
Pliny, and Voiture may regain their reputation." The comments on Pope's
sincerity were plainly ironical. Fenton considered him to be extremely
hypocritical, and some person concerned in the publication of 1726 must
have formed the same opinion of his character, if the ludicrous
tail-piece is intended to be typical of the letters. A little man whose
diminutive stature did not permit him to clasp the taller figure in his
arms while they stood upon a level, is represented as having jumped off
the ground and seized his companion round the waist, who, with his hands
thrown into the air at the painful vehemence of the embrace, is
struggling to get loose. Undiscerning persons, who judged the poet by
his words, would form a different estimate, and would perceive only
proofs of his excellence where Fenton saw examples of his habitual
insincerity. "His correspondence," says Johnson, of the later collection
of 1735, "filled the nation with praises of his candour, tenderness, and
benevolence, the purity of his purposes, and the fidelity of his
The letters to Cromwell had more than an ephemeral success. Curll, in
his reply in 1729 to the attack on him in the Dunciad, after noticing
Pope's affected depreciation of them, says, "However, they sell very
following them up by a second set. Theobald, who had earned his lasting
enmity by pointing out the errors in his edition of Shakespeare, was
employed by some booksellers to edit the posthumous papers of Wycherley,
which had been purchased from his heir. The work appeared in 1728. Pope
saw in this circumstance a pretence for dragging his own letters before
the world, and an opportunity of gratifying his spleen against Theobald.
He said that the poems were disreputable to the memory of his early
friend, and that the correspondence was published because it showed that
reverse. The last printed letter of Wycherley exhibits him as intent as
ever upon preparing his poems for the press, and if we are to believe
that he subsequently abandoned the design, we must accept the fact upon
the bare assertion of Pope, which derives no support from any part of
the correspondence. But though it failed to answer the purpose avowed by
its editor, it answered purposes not avowed which were much nearer to
his heart. It shows that the verses of Wycherley were rugged, feeble,
and full of repetitions, and that whatever they possessed of strength
and harmony was due to the revision of Pope. It shows that he furnished
entire passages, and where the text is not explicit on the point he is
careful to reclaim his contributions in the notes. It displays on the
one hand the "first sprightly runnings" of the precocious young poet,
and on the other the "last dull droppings" of the veteran author, who
was verging upon his dotage. "If we were to judge," says Warburton, "of
this set of letters by the manner of thinking and turn of expression, we
should conclude that they were all mistitled, and that those given to
the boy of sixteen were written by the man of seventy, and the
contrary,--such sober sense, such gravity of manners, and so much
judgment and knowledge of composition, enlivened with manly wit,
distinguish those of Mr. Pope, while a childish jealousy, a puerile
affectation, a lying at catch for points, together with a total contempt
of method, make up the character of those of Mr. Wycherley." Warton
transcribes the judgment of Warburton, and adds his testimony to the
superiority of the letters of Pope. He says that he "has excelled
Wycherley in his own way of striving to be always witty," and that "the
perpetual attempt of the vain old man to be brilliant, the accumulation
of simile upon simile, the antithesis, the cant of satire, the severity
on authors, critics, and women, are sufficiently disgusting." In short,
the whole effect of the correspondence was to display the infirmities
of Wycherley and the merits of Pope; and his mode of relieving his
departed friend from the reproach of the posthumous poems was to reveal
the secret that the only portions of them which might have done him
credit were not his own, but the work of this zealous vindicator of his
fame.
With such a futile excuse for printing the letters, Pope was anxious to
throw the responsibility upon some other person. He was the intimate
friend of Edward, the second Earl of Oxford, who, without being
possessed of much ability, courted the society of eminent men, and who,
with no great tincture of literature, had inherited from his father a
passion for collecting books and manuscripts. His correspondence with
the poet descended, with the rest of his personal papers, to his only
child, who married the Duke of Portland in 1734. From the Duchess the
papers passed to her eldest daughter, Lady Elizabeth, wife to the third
Viscount Weymouth, who subsequently became the first Marquess of Bath.
The Oxford manuscripts were consequently removed to Longleat, where they
have remained ever since among the treasures of a library which is
friend we have his own record of the device he adopted. He wrote to Lord
Oxford in September, 1729, and complained that the publication of
Wycherley's posthumous poems was derogatory to their author, as well as
to the critic who had advised him to re-cast them. "Something," he said,
"will be necessary to be done to clear both his and my reputation, which
the letters under his hand will abundantly do; for which particular
reason I would desire to have them lodged in your lordship's hands." He
had been slow in discovering that something was necessary to be done to
clear the reputation of his deceased friend; for Theobald's book had
come forth in 1728, and it was now the autumn of 1729. His tardy zeal
appears to have been entirely begotten by the idea that it could be made
the pretext for producing the correspondence; but having once conceived
the scheme, he did not allow it to languish. On the 6th of October he
advanced a step further, and began to shadow forth the real object of
the request. He informed Lord Oxford that some of the letters were to be
printed, and asked permission to state that they were already in his
library, "which," says he, "they shall be as soon as you will give
orders to any one to receive them." "I would not," he went on, "appear
myself as publisher of them, but any one else may, or even the
bookseller be supposed to have procured copies of them,--formerly or
now, it is equal. Certain it is that no other way can justice be
rendered to the memory of a man to whom I had the first obligations of
friendship, almost in my childhood." Lord Oxford merely replied that if
the documents were left in a box with the porter, the man had orders to
place it in the library, and that any mention of that library would be
the poet designed to ascribe the publication to an imaginary agent. Pope
now considered him to be sufficiently prepared, and his next letter
disclosed the whole of the scheme, and at the same time announced its
execution. It then appeared that his noble dupe, who, as he was both
weak and amiable, was expected to prove a submissive tool, had been
asked to become the keeper of the manuscripts, that he might be held up
to the world as their publisher. "I am extremely obliged to you," Pope
wrote to him, "for your kind permission to quote your library, and to
mention it in what manner I pleased. I consulted Mr. Lewis upon the turn
of the preface, and have exceeded perhaps my commission on one point,
though we both judged it the right way; for I have made the publishers
say that your lordship permitted them a copy of some of the papers from
the library, where the originals remain as testimonies of the truth. It
is indeed no more than a justice due to the dead and to the living
the bookseller to print the papers in his library, when they were not
even sent to his house till after they were printed, and this fiction
was fathered upon him without so much as his leave being asked, or his
having been suffered to read a single line of the work he was stated to
have authorised. When Pope alleged that the proceeding was "no more than
a justice due to the dead and the living author," he must have hoped
that the outrage to Lord Oxford of which he had been guilty in
committing the act, would appear to be diminished by the assurance with
which he communicated it. His deceptions were not confined to the
preface. He shortly afterwards wrote to Swift, and contrived to mention
that he had contracted a friendship at sixteen with a man of seventy. "I
speak," he said, "of old Mr. Wycherley, some letters of whom,
by-the-bye, and of mine, the booksellers have got and printed, not
without the concurrence of a noble friend of mine and yours. I do not
much approve of it, though there is nothing in it for me to be ashamed
of, because I will not be ashamed of anything I do not do myself, or of
printed the letters with the concurrence of a noble friend, and the
noble friend had never heard a word on the subject till the printing was
completed. Pope did not much approve of it, and he had protested to Lord
Oxford that in no other way could justice be rendered to the memory of a
man to whom he had the first obligations of friendship. He would not be
ashamed of what he did not do himself, and he alone had edited the work
and sent it to the press. The value of his asseverations may be measured
by the triple falsehood he volunteered to Swift. He was aware that the
arguments by which he hoped to persuade Lord Oxford to become his dupe
would not impose upon the penetrating understanding of the Dean, and he
therefore openly repudiated what he was unable to excuse. If the
publication had vindicated Wycherley, it would have been its own
justification; but as it was put forth to do honour to Pope, he
sacrificed his veracity to avoid the imputation of vanity. He cruelly
sneered, in his "Prologue to the Satires" at the poor garretteer, who
urged the plea for printing his compositions that he was "obliged by
hunger and request of friends." The poet had not the excuse of hunger,
and he improved upon the model he satirised when he pretended that
_his_ friends had taken his papers, and printed them against his will.
The deception which Pope practised was never suspected till it was
revealed by his correspondence with Lord Oxford, which has hitherto
remained in manuscript. The repetition of the attempt on a more
elaborate scale was less successful, and it has always been believed by
the immense majority of inquirers that the promulgation of the
collection of 1735, which the poet vehemently denounced as an act of
intolerable treachery, was from first to last his own deed. "It seems,"
says Johnson, "that Pope being desirous of printing his letters, and not
knowing how to do, without imputation of vanity, what has in this
country been done very rarely, contrived an appearance of compulsion,
that when he could complain that his letters were surreptitiously
Fresh facts have rendered the evidence against him stronger than ever,
and the whole derives increased force from the information we now
possess that he had previously had recourse to a kindred falsehood. In
the first case he made a tool of a friend; in the second, he varied his
plan, and made a tool of an enemy.
Pope tells us, in the preface to the authorised edition of his
correspondence, which he brought out in quarto in 1737, that his disgust
at the publication of his letters to Cromwell, and "the apprehension of
more treatment of the same kind, put him upon recalling as many as he
friend Caryll, in December, 1726, to surrender his collection; and, on
renewing the request a few days later, he added, "I have desired the
same thing of Mrs. Blount, with whose late worthy husband I entertained
so long a correspondence, and of all others." It was more than two years
before Caryll could be induced to comply with the demand, and it would
seem that Mrs. Blount was little less backward; for, on November 28,
letters of about fifteen and twenty years old." When the poet had
gleaned together all the letters he could extort, "he immediately," he
says, "lessened the number by burning three parts in four of them: the
rest he spared, not in any preference of their style or writing, but
merely as they preserved the memory of some friendships which will ever
be dear to him, or set in a true light some matters of fact from which
the scribblers of the time had taken occasion to asperse either his
friends or himself." He was not more anxious to destroy the three parts
than to secure the fourth from destruction. "He laid by the originals
together with those of his correspondents, and caused a copy to be taken
to deposit in the library of a noble friend, that in case either of the
revival of slanders, or the publication of surreptitious letters during
friend was Lord Oxford, and the request to be allowed to place the
letters in his library was made by Pope in September, 1729, when he
stated that "he had had it at heart for half a year and more." Upon
obtaining Lord Oxford's consent, he had the correspondence transcribed
under his own inspection; and on October 16 he says, "I am causing the
manuscripts to be fairly written, and hope at your lordship's return to
be the presenter of them in person." By his own avowal he had carefully
culled his letters, had prepared the selected portions for some public
purpose, and had taken the unusual precaution of preserving them in
duplicate. The end which he declared they were intended to serve was a
palpable pretence. He never specified any slanders they refuted, and he
could have had little idea of employing them to test the truth of
surreptitious letters when he began by burning three parts of the
collection, and only retained a fourth. The manifest fact was, that,
while he was desirous of consigning to oblivion those portions of his
correspondence which would not add to his reputation, he was eager to
circulate the picked specimens which he imagined would promote his fame.
No advance seems to have been made towards the accomplishment of his
design till 1733, when Curll advertised a life of Pope. An unknown
person who wrote a feigned hand, and who signed his letters with the
initials P. T., then opened a correspondence with the bookseller, and
furnished some information upon the genealogy of the poet. He vindicated
him from the charge of plebeian descent, and affirmed that he sprung
Pope in one of the notes to his "Prologue to the Satires," though Mr.
Pottinger, his cousin, ridiculed the "fine pedigree," which had never
There is thus at starting a curious identity between the apocryphal
statements of P. T. and the apocryphal statements of Pope. But as P. T.
must have had access to the manuscripts in the keeping of Lord Oxford,
he might be supposed to have found the account among the memoranda of
the poet, and no great stress could be laid upon the coincidence to
prove that P. T. was Pope in disguise, if the general tenor of the
correspondence did not indicate its origin.
There was a feud between Pope and Curll. The bookseller believed that
the poet had drugged him with an emetic, he had been subsequently
satirised in the Dunciad, and he had lost no opportunity of retaliating.
An uncompromising panegyric upon his antagonist would have run counter
to his prejudices, and while P. T. is careful to tell nothing which is
not for the honour of Pope, he has the precaution to consult the
antipathies of Curll. He pretends that the poet, with whom he was
formerly well acquainted, has treated him like a stranger, and that he
cannot give so good an account of his manners as of his parentage. He
promises, if he receives encouragement, to make these moral deficiencies
the subject of a future letter, "without entering into anything in
anywise libellous." He omitted, however, in his next communication, to
keep this part of his engagement, and never reverted to it. He had
spoken of Pope's family in the same flattering and perhaps fictitious
terms as Pope himself; but, in spite of his pledge, and his animosity,
he forbore to relate the minutest particular to the discredit of the
poet. The inconsistency between the assumed character and the actual
conduct of P. T. is much too glaring. An enemy would have been far less
partial and considerate.
The first communication of P. T. was dated October 1733. He directed
Curll to signify the acceptance of his offer by inserting in the Daily
Advertiser the notice, "E. C. hath received a letter, and will comply
with P. T." This Curll did, and on the 15th of November got an answer
from P. T., in which the true purpose of the manoeuvre transpires.
Instead of sending traits of the defects in Pope's manners, he announces
that he has "a large collection of his letters from the former part of
his days till the year 1727, which will alone make the most authentic
memoirs of him that could be." He adds that they will form a four or
five shilling volume, and "yet I expect no more," he says, "than what
will barely pay a transcriber, that the originals may be preserved in
mine or your hands to vouch for the truth of them." He appealed to the
hatred as well as to the avarice of the bookseller. He again asserted
that he had experienced bad treatment from Pope and that his sole motive
was "to bestow upon him" the same "care" which Curll had done
collection consisted of the identical letters which the poet had
prepared for the press, and which were intended to raise instead of to
lower his reputation. The conduct of P. T., who, having abjured profit
and only feigned revenge, was to get nothing by his roguery, is
altogether incomprehensible, if we are to suppose that he was what he
professed; but his conduct ceases to be a mystery if P. T. was Pope,
who, having finished editing his letters, may be presumed to have had
the same desire to find a pretext for printing them as he had exhibited
in the instance of the correspondence with Wycherley.
The point upon which the bargain went off for a time is equally
significant. P. T. enclosed an advertisement of the letters, and
required as a preliminary that it should be put forth by Curll, "for I
shall not," he said, "be justified to some people on whom I have
dependence, unless it seem to the public eye as no entire act of mine;
but I may be justified and excused if, after they see such a collection
is made by you, I acknowledge I sent some letters to contribute
could believe that Curll, without his aid, had got at the bulk of the
correspondence, they would quite as readily have credited that he had
not assisted the bookseller to the remainder. Nor is it likely that the
men who would have renounced P. T. if he had been a principal in the
business, would have connived at his becoming an accomplice. His plea
was as fanciful as his desire for revenge; but assume that Pope was the
real negotiator and his motive is transparent. The advertisement would
have threatened that very surreptitious publication of his letters,
against which he affirmed that he kept his own version in readiness. He
would have repudiated the impending piracy, and hastened in self-defence
to commit the genuine edition to the press. The promise contained in the
advertisement, that "the originals would be shown at Curll's when the
book was published," would have empowered him to give an air of
imposture to the transaction, and to damage his foe, who when challenged
would not have been able to produce the documents. According to the
language which Pope uttered in the name of P. T. he did expect to be
justified in his proceedings by means of the advertisement, but not at
all in the manner which he wished the bookseller to believe.
All the conditions required by Pope seemed met together in Curll. He was
an enemy, and could be denounced when he had been deceived. He had
printed the letters to Cromwell without the consent of the poet, and it
would readily be credited that he had repeated the act. He was not nice
in his notions of honour, and he might be expected to catch at an offer,
however discreditable, which promised both profit and revenge. But
whatever might be his greediness and his malice, they had not swallowed
up his caution, and notwithstanding that P. T. wrote again to express
his dissatisfaction that no advertisement appeared, Curll forbore to
announce letters he did not possess, at the bidding of a conspirator
whose name and person he did not know. The subject in consequence slept
from November 1733 till March 1735, when the poet was meditating some
fresh proceeding respecting his correspondence, for on the third of that
month, he requested Lord Oxford to send him by the hearer "the bound
book of copies of letters," which, he wanted, he said, "to inspect for a
day or two." There are transcripts among the Oxford papers of some of
the letters of Wycherley to Pope, which appeared in 1729. There are
transcripts of Pope's correspondence with Atterbury, which appeared in
which appeared in 1741. But while the earlier and later letters are
preserved on loose sheets the bound book has vanished, and there is not
a single transcript of any letter which was first given to the world in
the collection of 1735. The probability is that the book which Pope
professed to require for a day or two was never returned. The
circumstance is the more suspicious because he had the originals at
home, which would have served him for reference, whereas if his object
was to commit the letters clandestinely to the press he would use the
copy which had been specially prepared for the purpose,--which had been
expurgated, altered, and sometimes remodelled. Accordingly we find that
P. T. reappears at this crisis with the correspondence in print. He had
failed to lure Curll by a promise of letters which he would not produce.
He now changed his tactics, and offered him an entire impression of the
book.
This second act of the plot was opened by a communication of Curll to
Pope on the 22nd of March, three weeks after the letters had been
withdrawn from the library of Lord Oxford. He invited the poet to close
their differences, and, as a proof of his readiness to oblige him, sent
him the old advertisement of P. T. Curll asserted that he took the step
another, which seems to be inconsistent with it, and says that the
discovery of the advertisement, when arranging his papers, determined
however, of any contradiction in the double account, it is probable that
he may have been influenced by some concurring advice. It strengthens
this view that Pope, in an anonymous "Narrative," which he subsequently
put forth, reports what Curll told a few days later, "to persons who
people about him in the interest of the poet, and these sifters, as the
critic in the Athenaeum remarks, might, when needful, become prompters.
The progress of events proved that the letter of Curll was at least
singularly opportune, and if not written "by direction," was one of
those fortunate chances which often contribute to the success of the
best laid schemes. Pope replied to it by inserting an advertisement in
the "Grub Street Journal," the "Daily Journal," and "The Daily Post
Boy." He stated in this manifesto, that Curll "pretended that P. T. had
offered him to print a large collection of Pope's letters," that he
would have no correspondence with Curll, that he knew no such person as
P. T., that he believed the letters to be a forgery, and that he should
any intercourse with a former enemy of no good fame, but it was a
strange return for his peace-offering that he should advertise an insult
on him, and equally singular when he was incredulous, and had resolved
not to trouble himself about the matter, that he should parade in the
newspapers the contents of a private note. Yet extraordinary as was his
conduct, if he had not any covert design, it was consistent enough if he
was the agent in the plot for bringing his letters before the world. His
advertisement would convey the impression that he could not have
connived at the publication he was contriving; it would afford an
opening for P. T. to come again upon the stage; and by infuriating Curll
it would induce him to close at once with the proposal which was ready
to be made to him. In conformity with this supposition P. T., who had
not communicated with the bookseller for upwards of two years, saw the
advertisement directly it appeared, and he lost not an instant in
informing Curll that since their last negotiation he had printed the
was generous and would still give him the preference. The game required
that Pope should be incapable of being conciliated, and P. T. of taking
offence.
P. T. demanded that Curll should show he was in earnest by putting forth
the old advertisement. Curll complied, and the negotiation went forward.
An agent was sent to him who assumed the name of Smythe and professed to
be a clergyman, but who was so little conversant with the character he
personated that he wore a clerical gown and lawyer's bands. On the 7th
of May he went to Curll's house at night; and, to bring the bargain to a
conclusion, exhibited to him most of the sheets of the volume, and a
Pope, for the purpose of discrediting the promise which had been made in
the advertisement, that the originals should be produced when the book
appeared, had committed himself to the assertion that they all remained
in the Athenaeum, have been out of his possession, and doing service on
the evening when Smythe trafficed with Curll. The bookseller was not
likely to be deceived, for he had the Cromwell correspondence in his
likely to deceive, for he told the fact in the course of a
straight-forward story, without perceiving, or at least without pointing
out, its force in attesting the connivance of Pope.
Fifty copies of the letters were in the possession of Curll by the 12th
of May, and were speedily sold. Smythe sent for him at one o'clock to a
tavern in Leicester Fields, and half an hour afterwards one hundred and
ninety additional copies were brought by a couple of porters, who were
directed to carry them to the shop of the bookseller. There they were
immediately seized by an order from the House of Lords, and Curll was
breach of privilege to publish the writings of any member of their body
without his consent. Curll, in an advertisement which appeared for the
first time that morning, had given a list of the persons to whom Pope's
letters were addressed, and among the names were those of the Earl of
Halifax and the Earl of Burlington. To print letters to lords was no
offence. It was necessary that there should be letters from them, and of
this there was no other indication than that the list of names was
followed by the words,--"with the respective answers of each
it issued wet from the press were, as Johnson states, instigated by
he had never set eyes upon the book before it was published, curiosity
would still have prompted him to turn over the leaves, and he must
immediately have discovered that it did not contain a single letter from
a peer. The wording of the advertisement may, therefore, be suspected to
have been devised by him to afford a colour for what he must have known
was a groundless prosecution. A committee was appointed to investigate
the complaint. It met on the 14th of May, and the case would have ended
as soon as it was begun, if Pope's spokesman, Lord Hay, who resided at
Twickenham, and was one of his associates, had not adduced from a letter
to Jervas a passage which he alleged to be a reflection on Lord
Burlington. But the person who furnished the work to Curll had, by an
elaborate device, provided against a charge which no one except its
contriver could have foreseen. The fifty copies, which were sold on the
morning of the 12th, before the power of the House of Lords was put in
motion, contained the letter. Those which were furnished in the middle
of the day, as if to meet the messenger sent to seize them, were all
defective, and in every case the letter to Jervas was among the
back, but every trace of it had been obliterated by an alteration at
the printing-press. In the complete work the missing letter commenced on
note on Trumbull, which began at p. 114, is carried on to the top of p.
the correspondence, is added to cover a little of the vacant space. The
word "Finis" follows the note, though, in spite of this indication that
the whole is concluded, the work recommences on p. 117 with the letters
extraordinary to be undesigned. Pope, who had incited the prosecution
the very hour the book was published, and who had been in such haste to
instruct Lord Hay that the debate in the House of Lords was concluded,
and the sheets seized by two o'clock, could alone have adapted one batch
to afford a pretext for the proceeding, and another batch to render the
proceeding abortive,--he alone could have arranged the delivery of the
respective parcels, and sent the fifty copies which contained the
obnoxious passage, in time to be sold in the morning, and the one
hundred and ninety copies in which it was wanting, just in time to be
captured by the messenger from the House of Lords. His object was not to
procure the confiscation of the correspondence, and stop the sale. He
wished to simulate indignation, and divert suspicion from himself
without interfering with the success of the work, and he conducted the
prosecution with so much care to ensure defeat that we may readily
credit the assertion of Curll, "that the lords declared they had been
While the copies seized by the messenger had not the letter to Jervas,
they contained in compensation an address "to the reader," which was not
in the first fifty copies sent to Curll. This preface betrays throughout
the hand of Pope. The original proposition was that it should be
furnished by Curll; and, notwithstanding the revenge by which he
professed to be actuated, P. T. maintained that the poet ought to be
mentioned with praise. "We must by no means," he said, "seem to use him
with disregard, but rather commend, lest by any circumstances I writ to
appearance of the Dunciad, and Pope was not so universally beloved as
that the intimation that the correspondence was put forth by an enemy
could direct suspicion to the culprit. The pretence was too palpable to
impose upon any one, and P. T., who, among other motives for his
procedure, probably mistrusted Curll's cordiality or skill in a
panegyric, determined upon consideration to supply it himself. He was
not sparing in his tribute. "Mr. Pope," he wrote, "has not any great
cause to think the publication much offence to his modesty, or
reflection on his judgment, when we take care to inform the public that
there are few letters of his in this collection which were not written
under twenty years of age. On the other hand, we doubt not the reader
will be much more surprised to find at that early period so much variety
of style, affecting sentiment, and justness of criticism in pieces which
must have been writ in haste, very few perhaps ever re-viewed, and none
the poet. He coveted the distinction of precocity of talent, and was
perpetually directing attention to the early age at which he affirmed,
and sometimes falsely, that many of his letters and poems were penned.
He asserted that his most finished epistles were thrown off in haste,
which, as they were always held to bear the marks of labour in every
sentence, is the last topic of praise that would have been selected by
anybody else. He was anxious to persuade the world that they were not
revised before they were published, and he prevaricated to foster the
which no one believed, and which could least of all be credited by the
assumed traitor who transcribed them from the copy that had been
deposited in the library of Lord Oxford to ensure their preservation.
The vindictive P. T. was both so fortunate and so hearty in his
commendations that he proved the mere echo of Pope in his
self-applauding moods.
The other topics in the address "to the reader" were the same topics
which were subsequently reiterated by the poet. In his narrative of the
P. T. plot, and in the preface to the authorised edition of his
correspondence, he relates the method by which the Cromwell letters were
beforehand with him in citing the precedent to explain the means by
which his piratical volume was formed, and to justify its
the Wycherley letters was much more peculiar. Lord Oxford appears to
have refused to father the volume of 1729, for Pope never again alleged
that he sent it to the press. But neither did the poet avow that he
himself was responsible for its appearance. On the contrary, he renewed
the false statement that the letters were not printed till after they
were deposited in Lord Oxford's library, and spoke indefinitely of the
agency through which they were given to the world. "It happened soon
after," he says in his Narrative, "that the posthumous works of Mr.
Wycherley were published in such a manner as could no way increase the
reputation of that gentleman, who had been Mr. Pope's first
correspondent and friend; and several of these letters so fully showed
the state of that case that it was thought but justice to Mr.
"The next year," he says, in the preface to the quarto of 1737, "the
posthumous works of Mr. Wycherley were printed in a way disreputable
enough to his memory. It was thought a justice due to him, to show the
world his better judgment, and that it was his last resolution to have
suppressed those poems. As some of the letters which had passed between
him and our author cleared that point, they were published in 1729, with
Wycherley," says P. T.'s address to the reader, "were procured some
years since on account of a surreptitious edition of his posthumous
works. As those letters showed the true state of that case, the
publication of them was doing the best justice to the memory of Mr.
excuse for divulging them; but how came the vindictive P. T. to be the
first to hit upon an untruth in which he had no sort of interest, and to
serve the cause of his antagonist by promulgating the fanciful
description? Pope ascribed the publication to an indefinite agency, to
avoid acknowledging that he was the sole originator of the work; but how
came his enemy P. T. to anticipate his wishes, and the ambiguous
phraseology in which he conveyed them? The identity of thought and
expression was the more singular that P. T., in a private communication
to Curll, had confirmed the original story of the poet, and asserted
that "a noble lord had handed to the press the letters of
the same which was adopted a week or two afterwards by Pope.
A coincidence remains which more than all the rest proclaims Pope to be
the author of the address "to the reader." Nothing would have served
better his purpose in the prosecution than to prevail upon Curll to
confess that the letters were of his own procuring and printing. Upon
the seizure of the books Smythe wrote to him in the name of P. T.,
promising that he should have the work upon easier terms, and holding
out the prospect of a second and more important volume of correspondence
if he would keep secret the whole transaction, would assert that he had
the letters from different hands, and avow that he had printed them, as
Curll, and which was appended, as if in anticipation of the event, to
all the copies carried off to the House of Lords, contained the same
tale he was instructed to tell. "The collection," it said, "hath been
owing to several cabinets, some drawn from thence by accidents, and
others, even of those to ladies, voluntarily given. It is to one of that
Esq., which letters being lent her by that gentleman she took the
liberty to print." On the 12th of May, the day the work was published,
Pope gave a similar account to Caryll of the mode by which the contents
were procured. "What," he said, "makes me sick of writing is the
shameless industry of such fellows as Curll, and the idle ostentation,
or weak partiality of many of my correspondents, who have shown about my
letters (which I never writ but in haste, and generally against the
grain, in mere civility; for almost all letters are impertinent further
than _Si vales, bene est; ego valeo_) to such a degree that a volume of
two hundred or more are printed by that rascal. But he could never have
injured me this way, had not my friends furnished him with the occasion,
by keeping such wretched papers as they ought to have burned." The whole
of this passage is an egregious specimen of misrepresentation and
hypocrisy. A glance at the work must have revealed to Pope that the new
letters it contained were those which had been returned to him,--the
letters to Gay, Digby, Blount, and Caryll; that it comprised letters
depositary; that the text was not taken from the originals, but from the
copy he had amended and re-cast; and that it was, therefore, impossible
that his acquaintances should have furnished materials which could only
have been derived from one source,--the bound book in the Oxford
library. His pretence that his letters were hasty and insignificant
expressions of civility, when he had spared no pains in collecting and
editing them; his affected indignation at his friends "for keeping such
wretched papers as they ought to have burned," when he himself had
preserved them in duplicate, and designed them for publication; his
transparent fiction that almost the entire circle of his
correspondents,--Addison, Steele, Congreve, Gay, Walsh, Trumbull,
Craggs, Digby, Blount, and others,--had been guilty of "idle ostentation
or weak partiality," in showing these "wretched papers" to somebody who
transcribed them for the press,--are all so many additional arguments to
show the conscious guilt of Pope, and the gross and clumsy inventions by
which he endeavoured to divert suspicion. The fable he concocted is, in
its essential circumstance, identical with the fabulous story of P. T.
While P. T. on his part is telling a falsehood to the public in the
preface, and begging the bookseller to tell it in the House of Lords,
Pope on his own behalf is telling the same falsehood in private to
Caryll. This concurrence of misrepresentation between the letter of the
poet, and P. T.'s address "to the reader" and instructions to Curll,
could not have proceeded from independent and hostile persons.
Curll did not choose, when he was before the Committee of the House of
Lords, to father the lie which had been suggested to him. The
proceedings were adjourned from the 14th to the 15th, that the clerk
might search through some more copies of the book for the missing letter
to Jervas, and P. T. employed the interval in again pressing Curll to
assume the entire responsibility of the work. He gently rebuked him for
owning that the books were sent by an unknown hand which might, he said,
"be thought shuffling, and induce inquiry and suspicion of some dark
transaction;" and he assured him that the lords would consider him more
sincere if he professed that he had the letters from different hands,
evidencing his sincerity by deposing to a falsehood, and of silencing
inquiry and suspicion by pretending that he had procured a quantity of
manuscripts from a variety of persons whom he must have refused to name.
"My defence," he replied, "is right; I only told the Lords I did not
know from whence the books came. This was strict truth and prevented all
persuade the bookseller to commit himself to a lie was as gratuitous as
it was shameless, for he had no interest in the deception he urged.
Curll had several weeks before announced to Pope that this mysterious
agent was the collector of the letters, and Pope in communicating the
intelligence to the public declared that he knew no such person. The
renewed mention of a couple of fanciful initials could not increase P.
T.'s risk of detection, any more than it could signify whether he had
sold the correspondence to Curll to be printed, or had printed it first
and sold it afterwards. But what would have been purposeless in P. T.
was important to Pope. The friends who had returned him the letters
which appeared in the volume must have joined with the public in
ascribing the work to him, and it was of the utmost moment that Curll
should absolve him from the imputation. Having entrapped his victim into
a false confession, he would have loudly appealed to it to prove that he
was not only innocent but injured. He would have complained to the
world, as he had done to Caryll, of the "idle ostentation and weak
partiality" which had caused his hasty and artless letters to be
printed, and his vanity would have been doubly gratified by the
appearance that his choicest compositions were the careless scratchings
of his pen, and that the personal and literary merits they displayed had
been forced into day to the grievous annoyance of his reluctant modesty.
Every incident which arose in the progress of the controversy
strengthened the case against Pope. At the same time that Smythe, on the
behalf of P. T., exhorted Curll to give false evidence before the House
of Lords, he informed the bookseller of the method by which a portion of
the correspondence had been acquired. P. T. had been engaged with a
noble friend of Mr. Pope in preparing for the press the letters of
Wycherley, and had caused some extra copies to be struck off. These, he
said, "put into his head the thought of collecting more," and when he
printed the materials he had since accumulated he imitated as closely as
merit of the revelation, and wished that Curll should see in it a proof
of the openness and confidence with which he was treated. In reality it
was an endeavour to explain the awkward circumstance that the prose part
of Pope's Wycherley had been done up with the letters of 1735. The
publication of 1729 was entitled the second volume of Wycherley's
"Posthumous Works," and contained a couple of notes referring to poems
which were inserted or omitted in what was called "the present edition."
But as Pope's letters were not an edition of Wycherley's Works, the
absurdity of the reference might have led at any moment to the exposure
of the fact that the sheets of the old book had been transferred to the
new, and it was better at once, by an air of candid confession, to
account for the importation than to run the risk of discovery. Curll had
soon a rival version to give of the manner in which these sheets were
procured. He announced that Gilliver, who published the Wycherley volume
of 1729, had declared that Pope bought of him the remainder of the
impression, consisting of six hundred copies, and directed the other
There can be no difficulty in deciding between these opposite
statements. The assertion of P. T. we know to be a falsehood, for Pope
himself, and not the noble friend, prepared the letters of Wycherley for
the press. None of the inferior agents could have carried off any large
number of books, without detection, nor could have stowed them away from
have been lucre, and yet thirty pounds were taken for three hundred
from the sheets that cost nothing. If, too, there was any truth in P.
T.'s story, he was encumbered with the pile of stolen goods when he
opened the correspondence with Curll in 1733, whereas it is clear from
his communications at that time that the idea of supplying printed books
had not then occurred to him. The trick which had been practised was
known to Pope when he put forth his "Narrative," and he might have
obtained a clue to the culprit by an investigation at the
printing-office. He nevertheless made no comments on the subject, nor,
loudly as he exclaimed against the abstraction of his letters, did he
breathe a whisper against the abstraction of the sheets of the
Wycherley. Not a single specimen, again, of the work of 1729 is now
known to exist, which is in some degree explained by its absorption into
the volume of 1735; but, on the supposition that the sheets transferred
to that volume were merely extra copies, struck off secretly for P. T.,
there is no reason why the Wycherley of 1729 should have disappeared.
The conflicting statement of Curll is not embarrassed by any of these
difficulties, and was never denied by either Gilliver or Pope, which is
of itself sufficient to establish its truth, when we bear in mind that,
instead of confronting calumny with silence, the poet denounced every
charge he could repel.
The letter urging Curll anew to make a false statement of the means by
which he obtained the correspondence, was received by him on the morning
of May 15. "I am," he said, in his reply, "just again going to the Lords
double dealing had been strongly suspected on the previous day, when it
was discovered that the copies seized had been altered in anticipation
of the charge he preferred. There was now a second coincidence to