Produced by Paul Murray, Stephen Schulze and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. This ebook was produced using images from the
University of Georgia Libraries.
_Translated from the Original Old Norse Text into English_
_Translated from the Original Old Norse Text into English_
J. W. BUEL, Ph.D.,
(_After a painting by B. Guth_.)
Gunnar, Gunther, or Gunter, King of Burgundy, was probably a real
personage of the troubled times with which his name is associated--a
period distinguished as much for heroic characters as for tragic
events. Gunther represents the best type of kinghood of his age; a man
swayed by his affections rather than by ambition, who scrupled at
misdeeds, yet yielded to the mastering passions of love; one whose
instincts were loyalty to friends and country, and who shrank from
cruelties to gain his ends, but who fell a victim to woman's
fascinations. History accordingly praises him more for a lover than
for a sovereign.
Frontispiece--Gunnar (Gunther) Page
Siegfried Awakens Brynhild 159
Death of Atli 247
A Feast in Valhalla 331
Page
Preface by the Translator                        ix
Introduction to the Voluspa                      xv
The Vala's Prophecy                               1
The Lay of Vafthrudnir                            9
The Lay of Vegtam, or Baldur's Dream             26
The High One's Lay                               29
Odin's Rune Song                                 44
The Lay of Hymir                                 48
The Lay of Thrym, or the Hammer Recovered        53
The Lay of the Dwarf Alvis                       57
The Lay of Harbard                               63
The Journey, or Lay of Skirnir                   71
The Lay of Rig                                   78
Egir's Compotation, or Loki's Altercation        84
The Lay of Fiolsvith                             95
The Lay of Hyndla                               102
The Incantation of Groa                         109
The Song of the Sun                             111
The Lay of Volund                               121
The Lay of Helgi Hiorvard's Son                 127
The First Lay of Helgi Hundingcide              137
The Second Lay of Helgi Hundingcide             144
Sinfiotli's End                                 155
The Lay of Sigurd, or Gripir's Prophecy         157
The Lay of Fafnir                               172
The Lay of Sigrdrifa                            180
Fragments of the Lay of Sigurd and Brynhild     186
The Third Lay of Sigurd Fafnicide               194
Fragments of the Lay of Brynhild                203
The First Lay of Gudrun                         206
Brynhild's Hel-ride                             210
The Slaughter of the Niflungs                   212
The Second Lay of Gudrun                        213
The Third Lay of Gudrun                         219
Oddrun's Lament                                 221
The Lay of Atli                                 226
The Groenland Lay of Atli                       233
Gudrun's Incitement                             248
The Lay of Hamdir                               251
The Deluding of Gylfi                           256
Of the Primordial State of the Universe         259
Origin of the Frost-Giants                      260
Of the Cow Audhumla, and Birth of Odin          262
The Making of Heaven and Earth                  263
Creation of Man and Woman                       265
Night and Day, Sun and Moon                     266
Wolves that Pursue the Sun and Moon             267
The Way that Leads to Heaven                    268
The Golden Age                                  269
Origin of the Dwarfs, and Norns of Destiny      270
The Ash Yggdrasill and Mimer's Well             271
The Norns that Tend Yggdrasill                  273
The Wind and the Seasons                        275
Thor and His Hammer                             277
Balder and Njord                                278
Njord and His Wife Skadi                        279
The God Frey and Goddess Freyja                 280
Tyr and Other Gods                              281
Hodur the Blind, Assassin of Baldur             283
Loki and His Progeny                            284
Binding the Wolf Fenrir                         285
The Goddesses and their Attributes              289
Frey, and Gerda the Beautiful                   291
The Joys of Valhalla                            293
The Wonderful Horse Sleipnir                    297
The Ship Adapted to Sail on Sea or Land         299
Thor's Adventures in the Land of Giants         300
The Death of Baldur                             315
Baldur in the Abode of the Dead                 319
Loki's Capture and Punishment                   321
Destruction of the Universe                     323
Restoration of the Universe                     327
How Loki Carried Away Iduna                     329
The Origin of Poetry                            331
Odin Beguiles the Daughter of Baugi             333
Glossary                                          335
Sæmund, son of Sigfus, the reputed collector of the poems bearing his
name, which is sometimes also called the Elder, and the Poetic, Edda,
was of a highly distinguished family, being descended in a direct line
from King Harald Hildetonn. He was born at Oddi, his paternal dwelling
in the south of Iceland, between the years 1054 and 1057, or about 50
years after the establishment by law of the Christian religion in that
island; hence it is easy to imagine that many heathens, or baptized
favourers of the old mythic songs of heathenism, may have lived in his
days and imparted to him the lays of the times of old, which his
unfettered mind induced him to hand down to posterity.
The youth of Sæmund was passed in travel and study, in Germany and
France, and, according to some accounts, in Italy. His cousin John
Ogmundson, who later became first bishop of Holum, and after his death
was received among the number of saints, when on his way to Rome, fell
in with his youthful kinsman, and took him back with him to Iceland,
in the year 1076. Sæmund afterwards became a priest at Oddi, where he
instructed many young men in useful learning; but the effects of which
were not improbably such as to the common people might appear as
witchcraft or magic: and, indeed, Sæmund's predilection for the sagas
and songs of the old heathen times (even for the magical ones) was so
well known, that among his countrymen there were some who regarded him
as a great sorcerer, though chiefly in what is called white or
innocuous and defensive sorcery, a repute which still clings to his
memory among the common people of Iceland, and will long adhere to it
through the numerous and popular stories regarding him (some of them
highly entertaining) that are orally transmitted from generation to
generation.[1] Sæmund died at the age of 77, leaving behind him a work
on the history of Norway and Iceland, which is now almost entirely
lost.
The first who ascribed to Sæmund the collection of poems known as the
Poetic Edda,[2] was Brynjolf Svensson, bishop of Skalholt. This
prelate, who was a zealous collector of ancient manuscripts, found in
the year 1643, the old vellum codex, which is the most complete of
all the known manuscripts of the Edda; of this he caused a transcript
to be made, which he entitled _Edda Saemundi Multiscii_. The
transcript came into the possession of the royal historiographer
Torfæus; the original, together with other MSS., was presented to the
King of Denmark, Frederick. III., and placed in the royal library at
Copenhagen, where it now is.[3] As many of the Eddaic poems appear to
have been orally transmitted in an imperfect state, the collector has
supplied the deficiencies by prose insertions, whereby the integrity
of the subject is to a certain degree restored.
The collection called Sæmund's Edda consists of two parts, viz., the
Mythological and the Heroic. It is the former of those which is now
offered to the public in an English version. In the year 1797, a
translation of this first part, by A.S. Cottle, was published at
Bristol. This work I have never met with; nor have I seen any English
version of any part of the Edda, with the exception of Gray's spirited
but free translation of the Vegtamskvida.
The Lay of Volund (Volundarkvida) celebrates the story of Volund's
doings and sufferings during his sojourn in the territory of the
Swedish king Nidud. Volund (_Ger_. Wieland, _Fr_. Veland and Galans)
is the Scandinavian and Germanic Vulcan (Hephaistos) and Dædalus. In
England his story, as a skillful smith, is traceable to a very early
period. In the Anglo-Saxon poem of Beowulf we find that hero desiring,
in the event of his falling in conflict with Grendel, that his
corslets may be sent to Hygelac, being, as he says, the work of
Weland; and king Ælfred, in his translation of Boethius de
Consolatione, renders the words _fidelis ossa Fabricii, etc_. by Hwæt
(hwær) Welondes? (Where are now the bones of the famous and wise
goldsmith Weland?), evidently taking the proper name of Fabricius for
an appellative equivalent to faber. In the Exeter Book, too, there is
a poem in substance closely resembling the Eddaic lay. In his novel of
Kenilworth, Walter Scott has been guilty of a woeful perversion of the
old tradition, travestied from the Berkshire legend of Wayland Smith.
As a land-boundary we find Weland's smithy in a Charter of king Eadred
On the Lay of Helgi Hiorvard's Son there is nothing to remark beyond
what appears in the poem itself.
The Lays of Helgi Hundingcide form the first of the series of stories
relating to the Volsung race, and the Giukungs, or Niflungs.
The connection of the several personages celebrated in these poems
will appear plain from the following tables:
Sigi, king of Hunaland, said to be a son of Odin
|
Rerir
|
Volsung = a daughter of the giant Hrimnir
__________________|
|
Sigmund  =  Signi  =    Borghild    =  Hiordis
|     |         |                |
Hamund. Sinfiotli. Helgi = Sigrun Sigurd = Gudrun
__|____________
|               |
Sigmund, Svanhild.
m Jornmnrek.
Giuki = Grimhild.
_______________________|
|
Gunnar=Glaumvor. Hogni=Kostbera. Guthorm. Gudrun,=1 Sigurd.
|                           2 Atli.
Solar. Giuki. Snævar.                3 Jonakr.
Budli.
|
Atli = Gudrun: Brynhild = Gunnar.  Oddrun.  Beckhild = Heimir.
|                                               |
Erp. Eitil                                      Alsvid.
Jonakr = Gudrun
_____|   |__________
|                    |
Erp    Hamdir. Sorli.
The Eddaic series of the Volsung and Niflung lays terminates with the
Lay of Hamdir; the one entitled Gunnar's Melody is no doubt a
comparatively late composition; yet being written in the true ancient
spirit of the North is well deserving of a place among the Eddaic
poems. Nor, indeed, is the claim of the Lay of Grotti to rank among
the poems collected by Sæmund, by any means clear, we know it only
from its existence in the Skalda; yet on account of its antiquity, its
intrinsic worth, and its reception in other editions of the Edda, both
in original and translation, the present work would seem, and justly
so, incomplete without it.
The Prose, or Younger Edda, is generally ascribed to the celebrated
Snorre Sturleson, who was born of a distinguished Icelandic family, in
the year 1178, and after leading a turbulent and ambitious life, and
being twice the supreme magistrate of the Republic, was killed A.D.
three years old, John Loptson of Oddi, the grandson of Sæmund the
Wise, took him into fosterage. Snorre resided at Oddi until his
twentieth year, and appears to have received an excellent education
from his foster father, who was one of the most learned men of that
period. How far he may have made use of the manuscripts of Sæmund and
Ari, which were preserved at Oddi, it is impossible to say, neither do
we know the precise contents of these manuscripts; but it is highly
probable that the most important parts of the work, now known under
the title of "The Prose Edda," formed a part of them, and that
Snorre--who may be regarded as the Scandinavian Euhemerus--merely
added a few chapters, in order to render the mythology more
conformable to the erroneous notions he appears to have entertained
respecting its signification. Be this as it may, the Prose Edda, in
its present form, dates from the thirteenth century, and consists
of--1. _Formali_ (Fore discourse); or the prologue. 2. _Gylfa-ginning_
(The deluding of Gylfi). 3. _Braga-roedur_ (Conversations of Bragi).
Epilogue were probably written by Snorre himself, and are nothing more
than an absurd syncretism of Hebrew, Greek, Roman, and Scandinavian
myths and legends, in which Noah, Priam, Odin, Hector, Thor, Æneas,
&c, are jumbled together much in the same manner as in the romances of
the Middle Ages. These dissertations, utterly worthless in themselves,
have obviously nothing in common with the so-called "Prose Edda," the
first part of which, containing fifty-three chapters, forms a complete
synopsis of Scandinavian mythology, derived principally from the
Poetical Edda.
specimen.
Sæmund was residing, in the south of Europe, with a famous Master, by
whom he was instructed in every kind of lore; while, on the other
hand, he forgot (apparently through intense study) all that he had
previously learned, even to his own name; so that when the holy man
John Ogmundson came to his abode, he told him that his name was Koll;
but on John insisting that he was no other than Sæmund Sigfusson, born
at Oddi in Iceland, and relating to him many particulars regarding
himself, he at length became conscious of his own identity, and
resolved to flee from the place with his kinsman. For the purpose of
deceiving the master, John continued some time in the place, and often
came to visit him and Sæmund; till at last, one dark night, they
betook themselves to flight. No sooner had the Master missed them than
he sent in pursuit of them; but in vain, and the heavens were too
overcast to admit, according to his custom, of reading their
whereabouts in the stars. So they traveled day and night and all the
following day. But the next night was clear, and the Master at once
read in the stars where they were, and set out after them at full
speed. Then Sæmund, casting his eyes up at the heavens, said, "Now is
my Master in chase of us, and sees where we are." And on John asking
what was to be done, he answered: "Take one of my shoes off, fill it
with water, and set it on my head." John did so, and at the same
moment, the Master, looking up at the heavens, says to his companion:
"Bad news; the stranger John has drowned my pupil; there is water
about his forehead." And thereupon returned home. The pair now again
prosecute their journey night and day; but, in the following night,
the Master again consults the stars, when, to his great amazement, he
sees the star of Sæmund directly above his head, and again sets off
after the fugitives. Observing this, Sæmund says: "The astrologer is
again after us, and again we must look to ourselves; take my shoe off
again, and with your knife stab me in the thigh; fill the shoe with
blood, and place it on the top of my head." John does as directed, and
the Master, again gazing at the stars, says: "There is blood now about
the star of Master Koll, and the stranger has for certain murdered
him," and so returns home. The old man now has once more recourse to
his art; but on seeing Sæmund's star shining brightly above him, he
exclaimed: "My pupil is still living; so much the better. I have
taught him more than enough; for he outdoes me both in astrology and
magic. Let them now proceed in safety; I am unable to hinder their
departure."]
Eddaic poems to be of the 8th century. Sagabibliothek II, p, 131.]
is supposed to be of the beginning of the 14th century.]
not appear to have possessed any property whatever, though he
afterwards became the wealthiest man in Iceland. His rise in the world
was chiefly owing to his marriage with Herdisa, the daughter of a
priest called Bersi the Rich,--a very enviable surname, which no doubt
enabled the Rev. gentleman to brave the decrees of Popes and Councils,
and take to himself a wife--who brought him a very considerable
fortune. If we may judge from Snorre's biography, Christianity appears
to have effected very little change in the character of the
Icelanders. We have the same turbulent and sanguinary scenes, the same
loose conduct of the women, and perfidy, and remorseless cruelty of
the men, as in the Pagan times.]
As introductory to the Voluspa, the following description of a
wandering Vala or prophetess may be thought both desirable and
interesting: "We find them present at the birth of children, when they
seem to represent the Norns. They acquired their knowledge either by
means of _seid_, during the night, while all others in the house were
sleeping, and uttered their oracles in the morning; or they received
sudden inspirations during the singing of certain songs appropriate to
the purpose, without which the sorcery could not perfectly succeed.
These seid-women were common over all the North. When invited by the
master of a family, they appeared in a peculiar costume, sometimes
with a considerable number of followers, e.g. with fifteen young men
and fifteen girls. For their soothsaying they received money, gold
rings, and other precious things. Sometimes it was necessary to compel
them to prophesy. An old description of such a Vala, who went from
guild to guild telling fortunes, will give the best idea of these
women and their proceedings":--
"Thorbiorg, nicknamed the little Vala, during the winter attended the
guilds, at the invitation of those who desired to know their fate, or
the quality of the coming year. Everything was prepared in the most
sumptuous manner for her reception. There was an elevated seat, on
which lay a cushion stuffed with feathers. A man was sent to meet her.
She came in the evening dressed in a blue mantle fastened with thongs
and set with stones down to the lap; round her neck she had a
necklace of glass beads, on her head a hood of black lambskin lined
with white catskin; in her hand a staff, the head of which was mounted
with brass and ornamented with stones; round her body she wore a
girdle of agaric (knoske), from which hung a bag containing her
conjuring apparatus; on her feet were rough calfskin shoes with long
ties and tin buttons, on her hands catskin gloves, white and hairy
within. All bade her welcome with a reverent salutation; the master
himself conducted her by the hand to her seat. She undertook no
prophecy on the first day, but would first pass a night there. In the
evening of the following day she ascended her elevated seat, caused
the women to place themselves round her, and desired them to sing
certain songs, which they did in a strong, clear voice. She then
prophesied of the coming year, and afterwards, all that would advanced
and asked her such questions as they thought proper, to which they
received plain answers."
*       *       *       *       *
In the following grand and ancient lay, dating most probably from the
time of heathenism, are set forth, as the utterances of a Vala, or
wandering prophetess, as above described, the story of the creation of
the world from chaos, of the origin of the giants, the gods, the
dwarfs, and the human race, together with other events relating to the
mythology of the North, and ending with the destruction of the gods
and the world, and their renewal.
Heimdall,[5] they will that I Valfather's deeds recount, men's ancient
saws, those that I best remember.
reared. I nine worlds remember, nine trees, the great central tree,
beneath the earth.
nor gelid waves; earth existed not, nor heaven above, 'twas a chaotic
chasm, and grass nowhere.
mid-earth shaped. The sun shone from the south over the structure's
rocks: then was the earth begrown with herbage green.
about the heavenly horses. The sun knew not where she[6] a dwelling
had, the moon knew not what power he possessed, the stars knew not
where they had a station.
gods, and thereon held council: to night and to the waning moon gave
names; morn they named, and mid-day, afternoon and eve, whereby to
reckon years.
constructed; their strength they proved, all things tried, furnaces
established, precious things forged, formed tongs, and fabricated
tools;
the want of gold, until there came Thurs-maidens three, all powerful,
from Jötunheim.
gods, and thereon held council, who should of the dwarfs the race
create, from the sea-giant's blood and livid bones.
second; there in man's likeness they created many dwarfs from earth,
as Durin said.
Dvalin Nâr and Nâin, Niping, Dain, Bivör, Bavör, Bömbur, Nori, An and
Anar, Ai, Miodvitnir,
Vitr, and Litr, Nûr and Nýrâd, Regin and Râdsvid. Now of the dwarfs I
have rightly told.
Bruni, Bild, Bûri, Frâr, Hornbori, Fræg and Lôni, Aurvang, Iari,
Eikinskialdi.
Lofar up to reckon, those who came forth from the world's rock,
earth's foundation, to Iora's plains.
Glôi, Skirvir, Virvir, Skafid, Ai, Alf and Yngvi, Eikinskialdi,
Moin: that above shall, while mortals live, the progeny of Lofar,
accounted be.
from their assembly. They found on earth, nearly powerless, Ask and
Embla, void of destiny.
powers, nor goodly colour. Spirit gave Odin, sense gave Hoenir, blood
gave Lodur, and goodly colour.
limpid water: thence come the dews into the dales that fall; ever
stands it green over Urd's fountain.
under that tree stands; Urd hight the one, the second Verdandi,--on a
tablet they graved--Skuld the third. Laws they established, life
allotted to the sons of men; destinies pronounced.
prince; and in his eye she gazed.
all, where thou thine eye didst sink in the pure well of Mim." Mim
drinks mead each morn from Valfather's pledge.[8] Understand ye yet,
or what?
discourse, and a divining spirit: wide and far she saw o'er every
world.
god's people: Skuld held a shield, Skögul was second, then Gunn, Hild
Göndul, and Geirskögul. Now are enumerated Herian's maidens, the
Valkyriur, ready over the earth to ride.
they with lances pierced, and in the high one's[10] hall her burnt,
thrice burnt, thrice brought her forth, oft not seldom; yet she still
lives.
well-foreseeing Vala: wolves she tamed, magic arts she knew, magic
arts practised; ever was she the joy of evil people.
gods, and thereon held council, whether the Æsir should avenge the
crime,[11] or all the gods receive atonement.
foreseeing conflict, tramp o'er the plains. Odin cast [his spear], and
mid the people hurled it: that was the first warfare in the world.
gods, and thereon held council: who had all the air with evil mingled?
or to the Jötun race Od's maid had given?
of the like he hears. Oaths are not held sacred; nor words, nor
swearing, nor binding compacts reciprocally made.
holy tree. A river she sees flow, with foamy fall, from Valfather's
pledge. Understand ye yet, or what?
progeny: of all shall be one especially the moon's devourer, in a
troll's semblance.
with red gore defiles: swart is the sunshine then for summers after;
all weather turns to storm. Understand ye yet, or what?
the joyous Egdir; by him crowed, in the bird-wood, the bright red
cock, which Fialar hight.
sire of hosts; but another crows beneath the earth, a soot-red cock,
in the halls of Hel.
fate. There stood grown up, high on the plain, slender and passing
fair, the mistletoe.
dart. Hödr shot it forth; but Frigg bewailed, in Fensalir, Valhall's
calamity. Understand ye yet, or what?
like. There sits Sigyn, for her consort's sake, not right glad.
Understand ye yet, or what?
bonds from entrails made.
clods, Slîd is its name.
Sindri's race; and another stood in Okôlnir, the Jötuns beer-hall
which Brîmir hight.
doors are northward turned, venom-drops fall in through its apertures:
entwined is that hall with serpents' backs.
perjurers, and him who the ear beguiles of another's wife. There
Nidhögg sucks the corpses of the dead; the wolf tears men. Understand
ye yet, or what?
conflict.
violate. The earth resounds, the giantesses flee; no man will another
spare.
age, shields shall be cloven, a wind age, a wolf age, ere the world
sinks.
resounding Giallar-horn. Loud blows Heimdall, his horn is raised; Odin
speaks with Mim's head.
and the jötun is loosed. Loud bays Garm before the Gnupa-cave, his
bonds he rends asunder; and the wolf runs.
coiled in jötun-rage. The worm beats the water, and the eagle screams:
the pale of beak tears carcases; Naglfar is loosed.
the sea, and Loki steers. The monster's kin goes all with the wolf;
with them the brother is of Byleist on their course.
sword the Val-gods' sun. The stony hills are dashed together, the
giantesses totter; men tread the path of Hel, and heaven is cloven.
resounds; the Æsir are in council. The dwarfs groan before their stony
doors, the sages of the rocky walls. Understand ye yet, or what?
fight, and the bright slayer of Beli with Surt. Then will Frigg's
beloved fall.
deadly beast. He with his hands will make his sword pierce to the
heart of the giant's son: then avenges he his father.
monster to fight); Midgârd's Veor in his rage will slay the worm. Nine
feet will go Fiörgyn's son, bowed by the serpent, who feared no foe.
All men will their homes forsake.
bright stars, fire's breath assails the all-nourishing tree, towering
fire plays against heaven itself.
green, waterfalls descending; the eagle flying over, which in the fell
captures fish.
speak, and there to memory call their mighty deeds, and the supreme
god's ancient lore.
found, which in days of old had possessed the ruler of the gods, and
Fiölnir's race.
shall come; Hödr and Baldr, the heavenly gods, Hropt's glorious
dwellings shall inhabit. Understand ye yet, or what?
inhabit the spacious Vindheim. Understand ye yet, or what?
in Gimill: there shall be righteous people dwell, and for evermore
happiness enjoy.
from above, who rules o'er all. He shall dooms pronounce, and strifes
allay, holy peace establish, which shall ever be.
serpent, from Nida-fels. On his wings bears Nidhögg, flying o'er the
plain, a corpse. Now she will descend.
name of Rig, became the progenitor of the three orders of mankind.]
fem., the moon masc.]
was the end of the golden age.]
Odin visits the Giant (Jötun) Vafthrûdnir, for the purpose of proving
his knowledge. They propose questions relative to the Cosmogony of the
Northern creed, on the conditions that the baffled party forfeit his
head. The Jötun incurs the penalty.
_Odin_.
great desire, I say, I have, in ancient lore with that all-wise Jötun
to contend.
_Frigg_.
dwellings; because no Jötun is, I believe, so mighty as is
Vafthrûdnir.
_Odin_.
but this I fain would know, how in Vafthrûdnir's halls it is.
_Frigg_.
journeyings be; may thy wit avail thee, when thou, father of men!
shalt hold converse with the Jötun.
hall he came which Im's father owned. Ygg went forthwith in.
_Odin._
see; for I fain would know, whether thou art a cunning and all-wise
Jötun.
_Vafthrûdnir._
thou goest not from our halls, if thou art not the wiser.
_Odin._
halls, needing hospitality,--for I long have journeyed--and kind
reception from thee, Jötun!
_Vafthrûdnir._
a seat; then shall be proved which knows most, the guest or the
ancient talker.
_Gagnrâd._
hold his tongue: over-much talk brings him, I ween, no good, who
visits an austere man.
_Vafthrûdnir._
proficiency, how the horse is called that draws each day forth over
human kind?
_Gagnrâd._
kind. Of coursers he is best accounted among the Reid-goths. Ever
sheds light that horse's mane.
_Vafthrûdnir._
proficiency, how that steed is called, which from the east draws night
o'er the beneficent powers?
_Gagnrâd._
beneficent powers. He from his bit lets fall drops every morn, whence
in the dales comes dew.
_Vafthrûdnir._
proficiency, how the stream is called, which earth divides between the
Jötuns and the Gods?
_Gagnrâd._
Jötuns and the Gods: open shall it run throughout all time. On that
stream no ice shall be.
_Vafthrûdnir._
proficiency, how that plain is called, where in fight shall meet Surt
and the gentle Gods?
_Gagnrâd._
the gentle Gods; a hundred rasts it is on every side. That plain is to
them decreed.
_Vafthrûdnir._
let us together talk; we will our heads in the hall pledge, guest! for
wise utterance.
_Gagnrâd._
knowest, whence first came the earth, and the high heaven, thou,
sagacious Jötun?
_Vafthrûdnir._
hills, the heaven from the skull of that ice-cold giant, and from his
blood the sea.
_Gagnrâd._
knowest, whence came the moon, which over mankind passes, and the sun
likewise?
_Vafthrûdnir._
sun's: round heaven journey each day they must, to count years for
men.
_Gagnrâd._
Vafthrûdnir! knowest, whence came the day, which over people passes,
and night with waning moons?
_Vafthrûdnir._
born; the new and waning moons the beneficent powers created, to count
years for men.
_Gagnrâd._
Vafthrûdnir! knowest, whence winter came, and warm summer first among
the wise gods?
_Vafthrûdnir._
yearly they both shall ever journey, until the powers perish.
_Gagnrâd._
Vafthrûdnir! knowest, which of the Æsir earliest, or of Ymir's sons,
in days of old existed?
_Vafthrûdnir._
Thrûdgelmir was his sire, his grandsire Aurgelmir.
_Gagnrâd._
Vafthrûdnir! knowest, whence first came Aurgelmir, among the Jötun's
sons, thou sagacious Jötun?
_Vafthrûdnir._
Jötun; but sparks flew from the south-world: to the ice the fire gave
life.
_Gagnrâd_.
knowest, Vafthrûdnir! how he children begat, the bold Jötun, as he had
no giantess's company?
_Vafthrûdnir_.
boy together; foot with foot begat, of that wise Jötun, a six-headed
son.
_Gagnrâd_.
knowest, Vafthrûdnir! what thou doest first remember, or earliest
knowest? Thou art an all-wise Jötun.
_Vafthrûdnir_.
That I first remember, when that wise Jötun in an ark was laid.
_Gagnrâd_.
knowest, Vafthrûdnir! whence the wind comes, that over ocean passes,
itself invisible to man?
_Vafthrûdnir_.
in an eagle's plumage: from his wings comes, it is said, the wind,
that over all men passes.
_Gagnrâd_.
Vafthrûdnir! whence Niörd came among the Æsir's sons? O'er fanes and
offer-steads he rules by hundreds, yet was not among the Æsir born.
_Vafthrûdnir_.
gave. At the world's dissolution, he will return to the wise Vanir.
_Gagnrâd_.
knowest, Vafthrûdnir! what the Einheriar do in Haerfather's halls,
until the powers perish?
_Vafthrûdnir_.
fallen they choose, and from the conflict ride; beer with the Æsir
drink, of Saehrimnir eat their fill, then sit in harmony together.
_Gagnrâd_.
knowest, Vafthrûdnir! of the Jötuns' secrets, and of all the gods',
say what truest is, thou all-knowing Jötun!
_Vafthrûdnir_.
tell; for I have over each world travelled; to nine worlds I came, to
Niflhel beneath: here die men from Hel.
_Gagnrâd_.
proved. What mortals will live, when the great "Fimbul"-winter shall
from men have passed?
_Vafthrûdnir_.
holt. The morning dews they will have for food. From, them shall men
be born.
_Gagnrâd_.
proved. Whence will come the sun in that fair heaven, when Fenrir has
this devoured?
_Vafthrûdnir_.
her. The maid shall ride, when the powers die, on her mother's course.
_Gagnrâd_.
ocean travel, wise of spirit, journey?
_Vafthrûdnir_.
the sole Hamingiur who are in the world, although with Jötuns
nurtured.
_Gagnrâd_.
gods' possession, when Surt's fire shall be quenched?
_Vafthrûdnir_.
fire shall be quenched. Môdi and Magni will Miöllnir possess, and
warfare strive to end.
_Gagnrâd_.
when the powers perish?
_Vafthrûdnir_.
he his cold jaws will cleave, in conflict with the wolf.
_Gagnrâd_.
he on the pile was laid?
_Vafthrûdnir_.
son's ear. With dying mouth my ancient saws I have said, and the gods'
destruction. With Odin I have contended in wise utterances: of men
thou ever art the wisest!
The subject is wholly mythological.
King Hraudung had two sons, one named Agnar, the other Geirröd. Agnar
was ten, and Geirröd eight winters old. They both rowed out in a boat,
with their hooks and lines, to catch small fish; but the wind drove
them out to sea. In the darkness of the night they were wrecked on the
shore, and went up into the country, where they found a cottager, with
whom they stayed through the winter. The cottager's wife brought up
Agnar, and the cottager, Geirröd, and gave him good advice. In the
spring the man got them a ship; but when he and his wife accompanied
them to the strand, the man talked apart with Geirröd. They had a fair
wind, and reached their father's place. Geirröd was at the ship's
prow: he sprang on shore, but pushed the ship out, saying, "Go where
an evil spirit may get thee." The vessel was driven out to sea, but
Geirröd went up to the town, where he was well received; but his
father was dead. Geirröd was then taken for king, and became a famous
man.
Odin and Frigg were sitting in Hlidskiâlf, looking over all the world.
Odin said, "Seest thou Agnar, thy foster-son, where he is, getting
children with a giantess in a cave? while Geirröd, my foster-son, is a
king residing in his country." Frigg answered, "He is so inhospitable
that he tortures his guests, if he thinks that too many come." Odin
replied that that was the greatest falsehood; and they wagered
thereupon. Frigg sent her waiting-maid Fulla to bid Geirröd be on his
guard, lest the trollmann who was coming should do him harm, and also
say that a token whereby he might be known was, that no dog, however
fierce, would attack him. But that King Geirröd was not hospitable was
mere idle talk. He, nevertheless, caused the man to be secured whom no
dog would assail. He was clad in a blue cloak, and was named Grimnir,
and would say no more concerning himself, although he was questioned.
The king ordered him to be tortured to make him confess, and to be set
between two fires; and there he sat for eight nights. King Geirröd had
a son ten years old, whom he named Agnar, after his brother. Agnar
went to Grimnir and gave him a full horn to drink from, saying that
the king did wrong in causing him to be tortured, though innocent.
Grimnir drank from it. The fire had then so approached him that his
cloak was burnt; whereupon he said:--
My garment is singed, although I lift it up, my cloak is scorched
before it.
has offered, save only Agnar, the son of Geirröd, who alone shall rule
over the land of Goths.
be. For one draught thou never shalt get better recompense.
in Thrûdheim Thor shall dwell until the powers perish.
Alfheim the gods to Frey gave in days of yore for a tooth-gift.
decked the hall; Valaskiâlf 'tis called, which for himself acquired
the As in days of old.
resound; Odin and Saga there, joyful each day, from golden beakers
quaff.
stands spacious, there Hropt selects each day those men who die by
weapons.
its aspect. Its roof with spears is laid, its hall with shields is
decked, with corslets are its benches strewed.
its aspect. A wolf hangs before the western door, over it an eagle
hovers.
all-powerful Jötun; but Skadi now inhabits, the bright bride of gods,
her father's ancient home.
hall, in that land, in which I know exists the fewest crimes.
o'er the holy fanes: there the gods' watchman, in his tranquil home,
drinks joyful the good mead.
hall. She half the fallen chooses each day, but Odin th' other half.
silver decked. There Forseti dwells throughout all time, and every
strife allays.
prince of men; guiltless of sin, he rules o'er the high-built fane.
Landvîdi: There will the son descend, from the steed's back, bold to
avenge his father.
best; but few know how many Einheriar it feeds.
but on wine only the famed in arms, Odin, ever lives.
Hugin, that he come not back, yet more anxious am I for Munin.
rapid river seems too great for the battle-steed to ford.
before the holy gates: ancient is that lattice, but few only know how
it is closed with lock.
Eight hundred Einheriar will at once from each door go when they issue
with the wolf to fight.
its windings. Of all the roofed houses that I know, is my son's the
greatest.
bites from Lærâd's branches. He a bowl shall fill with the bright
mead; that drink shall never fail.
bites from Lærâd's branches; from his horns fall drops into
Hvergelmir, whence all waters rise:--
Fimbulthul, Rin and Rennandi, Gipul and Göpul, Gömul and Geirvimul:
they round the gods' dwelling wind. Thyn and Vin, Thöll and Höll, Grâd
and Gunnthorin.
Nön and Hrön, Slid and Hrid, Sylg and Ylg, Vîd and Vân, Vönd and
Strönd, Gioll and Leipt; these (two) fall near to men, but fall hence
to Hel.
each day, when he to council goes at Yggdrasil's ash; for the
As-bridge is all on fire, the holy waters boil.
Gisl and Falhôfnir, Gulltopp and Lettfeti; on these steeds the Æsir
each day ride, when they to council go, at Yggdrasil's ash.
one abides, under the second the Hrimthursar, under the third mankind.
ash; he from above the eagle's words must carry, and beneath to
Nidhögg repeat.
gnaw. Dâin and Dvalin, Duneyr and Durathrôr.
think of witless mortals: Gôin and Môin,--they are Grafvitnir's
sons--Grâbak and Grafvöllud, Ofnir and Svafnir, will, I ween, the
branches of that tree ever lacerate.
hart bites it above, and in its side it rots, Nidhögg beneath tears
it.
and Herfiotur, Hildi and Thrûdi, Göll and Geirölul, Randgríd and
Râdgrîd, and Reginleif, these bear beer to the Einheriar.
under their shoulder the gentle powers, the Æsir, have concealed an
iron-coolness.
refulgent deity; rocks and ocean must, I ween, be burnt, fell it from
its place.
ocean chases; another Hati hight, he is Hrôdvitnir's son; he the
bright maid of heaven shall precede.
bones the hills, of his hair trees and plants, of his skull the
heaven;
of men; but of his brain the heavy clouds are all created.
look to the fire; for open will the dwelling be, to the Æsir's sons,
when the kettles are lifted off.[12]
the best, for the bright Frey, Niörd's benign son.
ships, Skidbladnir, of the Æsir, Odin, and of horses, Sleipnir,
Bifröst of bridges, and of skallds, Bragi, Hâbrôk of hawks, and of
dogs, Garm, [Brimir of swords.]
will welcome help awake; from all the Æsir, that shall penetrate, to
Oegir's bench, to Oegir's compotation.[13]
Thekk and Thridi, Thund and Ud, Helblindi and Har,
Bâleyg, Bölverk, Fiölnir, Grîm and Grimnir, Glapsvid and Fiölsvid,
Farmatyr; by one name I never have been called, since among men I have
gone.
Kialar, when a sledge I drew; Thrôr at the public meetings, Vidur in
battles, Oski and Omi, Jafnhâr and Biflindi, Gôndlir and Harbard with
the gods.
that ancient Jötun, when of Midvitnir's renowned son I was the sole
destroyer.
greatly by mead beguiled. Much didst thou lose, when thou wast of my
help bereft, of all the Einheriar's and Odin's favour.
friends mislead thee. My friend's sword lying I see, with blood all
dripping.
out: Wroth with thee are the Dîsir: Odin thou now shalt see: draw near
to me if thou canst.
Thund, Vakr and Skilfing, Vâfudr and Hrôptatyr, with the gods, Gaut
and Jâlk, Ofnir and Svafnir, all which I believe to be names of me
alone.
King Geirröd was sitting with his sword lying across his knees, half
drawn from the scabbard, but on finding that it was Odin, he rose for
the purpose of removing him from the fires, when the sword slipt from
his hand with the hilt downwards; and the king having stumbled, the
sword pierced him through and killed him. Odin then vanished, and
Agnar was king for a long time after.
reference to a lost myth. It would seem that, through the intervention
of the kettles, the Æsir were unable to see Odin's unpleasant position
between the two fires.]
those of other interpreters. Odin raises his countenance to heaven, in
full confidence that when seen help will forthwith be afforded him.
Under the name of Oegir, Gierrod is generally understood: I rather
think the meaning to be, that all the Æsir who [sit at] Oegir's
compotation will forthwith come to his aid.]
conference, and they consulted, the mighty gods, why Baldr had
oppressive dreams.
dreams seemed departed. They the Jötuns questioned, wise seers of the
future, whether this might not forebode calamity?
all the dearest: that caused grief to Frigg and Svafnir, and to the
other powers--On a course they resolved:
not to harm. All species swore oaths to spare him; Frigg received all
their vows and compacts.
have departed; the Æsir he convenes, their counsel craves: at the
deliberation much is devised.]
thence down to Niflhel. A dog he met, from Hel coming.
throat, and nether jaw. It bayed and widely gaped at the sire of magic
song:--long it howled.
came. Then rode Ygg to the eastern gate, where he knew there was a
Vala's grave.
north looked, potent runes applied, a spell pronounced, an answer
demanded, until compelled she rose, and with deathlike voice she said:
_Vala_.
irksome course? I have with snow been decked, by rain beaten, and with
dew moistened: long have I been dead."
_Vegtam_.
from, earth I call on thee. For whom are those benches strewed o'er
with rings, those costly couches o'erlaid with gold?"
_Vala_.
shield is laid; but the Æsir race are in despair. By compulsion I have
spoken. I will now be silent."
_Vegtam_.
will yet know who will Baldr's slayer be, and Odin's son of life
bereave."
_Vala_.
the slayer be, and Odin's son of life bereave. By compulsion I have
spoken; I will now be silent."
_Vegtam_.
will yet know who on Hödr vengeance will inflict, or Baldr's slayer
raise on the pile."
_Vala_.
Odin's son, when one night old. He a hand will not wash, nor his head
comb, ere he to the pile has borne Baldr's adversary. By compulsion I
have spoken; I will now be silent."
_Vegtam_.
will yet know who the maidens are, that weep at will, and heavenward
cast their neck-veils? Tell me but that: till then thou sleepest not."
_Vala_.
Odin, lord of men!"
_Odin_.
three Thursar."
_Vala_.
again visit me, until Loki free from his bonds escapes, and Ragnarök
all-destroying comes."
difficult it is to know where foes may sit within a dwelling.
haste is he, who on the ways has to try his luck.
frozen; food and raiment a man requires, wheo'er the fell has
travelled.
hospitable invitation, a good reception; if he can get it, discourse
and answer.
laughing-stock is he who nothing knows, and with the instructed sits.
conduct cautious. When the prudent and taciturn come to a dwelling,
harm seldom befalls the cautious; for a firmer friend no man ever gets
than great sagacity.
silence, with his ears listens, and with his eyes observes: so
explores every prudent man.
sure is that which a man must have in another's breast.
for bad counsels have oft been received from another's breast.
that is thought better than riches in a strange place; such is the
recourse of the indigent.
beer-bibbing; so good is not, as it is said, beer for the sons of men.
beer-bibbing: for the more he drinks the less control he has of his
own mind.
steals the minds of men. With this bird's pinions I was fettered in
Gunnlods dwelling.
the best drunkenness, when every one after it regains his reason.
children be; joyous and liberal every one should be until his hour of
death.
but old age will give him no peace, though spears may spare him.
silent; but all at once, if he gets drink, then is the man's mind
displayed.
what disposition each man is ruled, who common sense possesses.
sensibly or be silent. As of a fault no man will admonish thee, if
thou goest betimes to sleep.
Oftentimes his belly draws laughter on a silly man, who among the
prudent comes.
foolish man never knows his stomach's measure.
thing he knows not, which he ought to know, that he is not free from
faults.
then grows tired; and when morning comes, all is lament as before.
feels it not, although they speak ill of him, when he sits among the
clever.
but he will find, if into court he comes, that he has few advocates.
difficulty; but he knows not what to answer, if to the test he is put.
no one knows that he knows nothing, unless he talks too much. He who
previously knew nothing will still know nothing, talk he ever so much.
conceal his ignorance no one can, because it circulates among men.
tongue, if it be not checked, sings often to its own harm.
stranger to his house. Many a one thinks himself wise, if he is not
questioned, and can sit in a dry habit.
to flight. Knows it not certainly he who prates at meat, whether he
babbles among foes.
each other. That strife will ever be; guest will guest irritate.
he goes; else he will sit and mope, will seem half-famished, and can
of few things inquire.
road he dwell; but to a good friend's the paths lie direct, though he
be far away.
becomes unwelcome, if he too long continues in another's house.
one his own master. Though he but two goats possess, and a
straw-thatched cot, even that is better than begging.
one his own master. Bleeding at heart is he, who has to ask for food
at every meal-tide.
forward; for it is hard to know when on the way a man may need his
weapon.
refused a present; or of his property so liberal that he scorned a
recompense.
for the hated oft is spared what for the dear was destined. Much goes
worse than is expected.
which are in themselves most sightly. Givers and requiters are longest
friends, if all [else] goes well.[16]
requite. Laughter with laughter men should receive, but leasing with
lying.
friend; but of his foe no man shall the friend's friend be.
whom thou woulds't good derive, thou shouldst blend thy mind with his,
and gifts exchange, and often go to see him.
good from him derive, thou shouldst speak him fair, but think
craftily, and leasing pay with lying.
suspectest his affection; before him thou shouldst laugh, and contrary
to thy thoughts speak: requital should the gift resemble.
I thought myself, when I met another. Man is the joy of man.
a base-minded man dreads everything; the niggardly is uneasy even at
gifts.
they seemed to be, when they got cloaks: exposed to insult is a naked
man.
bark nor leaves: such is the man whom no one favours: why should he
live long?
friends; but is quenched when the sixth day comes, and-friendship is
all impaired.
a trifle bought. With half a loaf and a tilted vessel I got myself a
comrade.
halves.
those men the lives are fairest, who know much well.
wise man's heart is seldom glad, if he is all-wise who owns it.
destiny let know no man beforehand; his mind will be freest from'
care.
quickened. Man to' man becomes known by speech, but a fool by his
bashful silence.
have. Seldom a sluggish wolf gets prey, or a sleeping man victory.
to; greatly is he retarded who sleeps the morn away. Wealth half
depends on energy.
fire-wood that may suffice, both measure and time.
his garments be not too good; of his shoes and breeches let no one be
ashamed, nor of his horse, although he have not a good one.
accounted sage. Let one only know, a second may not; if three, all the
world knows.
ocean; so is a man, who among many comes, and has few advocates.
will find, when among the bold he comes, that no one alone is
doughtiest.
trusting friends. Of the words that a man says to another he often
pays the penalty.
the beer was drunk, or not ready: the disliked seldom hits the moment.
needed; or two hams had hung, at that true friend's, where of one I
had eaten.
his health a man can have, with a life free from vice.
sons is happy, one in his kin, one in abundant wealth, one in his good
works.
always get a cow. I saw fire consume the rich man's property, and
death stood without his door.
deaf fight and be useful: to be blind is better than to be burnt[18]
no one gets good from a corpse.
departure. Gravestones seldom stand by the way-side unless raised by a
kinsman to a kinsman.
every cloak I expect a hand. * * *
the weather's changes in five days, but more in a month.
another. One man is rich, another poor: let him not be thought
blameworthy.
fame never dies of him who has earned it.
thing that never dies,--judgment on each one dead.
beggar's staff. Such are riches; as is the twinkling of an eye: of
friends they are most fickle.
grows within him, but wisdom never: he goes on more and more arrogant.
to the high ones known, which the great powers invented, and the
great talker[20] painted, that he had best hold silence.
sword after it is proved, a maid after she is married, ice after it
has passed away, beer after it is drunk.
the dark talk with a lass: many are the eyes of day. In a ship voyages
are to be made, but a shield is for protection, a sword for striking,
but a damsel for a kiss.
that is lean, a sword that is rusty; feed a horse at home, but a dog
at the farm.
woman says; for on a turning wheel have their hearts been formed, and
guile in their breasts been laid;
crow, a grunting swine, a rootless tree, a waxing wave, a boiling
kettle,
serpent, a woman's bed-talk, or a broken sword, a bear's play, or a
royal child,
corpse newly slain, [a serene sky, a laughing lord, a barking dog, and
a harlot's grief];
weather rules the field, and wit the son, each of which is doubtful;
house, an over-swift horse, (a horse is useless, if a leg be broken),
no man is so confiding as to trust any of these.
drove not rough-shod, on slippery ice, a spirited two-years old and
unbroken horse; or as in a raging storm a helmless ship is beaten; or
as if the halt were set to catch a reindeer in the thawing fell.[21]
men's minds towards women; 'tis then we speak most fair when we most
falsely think: that deceives even the cautious.
love. Praise the form of a fair damsel; he gets who courts her.
countenance oft captivates the wise, which captivates not the foolish.
All-powerful desire makes of the sons of men fools even of the wise.
conscious of our affections. No disease is worse to a sensible man
than not to be content with himself.
delight. Body and soul to me was that discreet maiden: nevertheless I
possess her not.
prince's joy to me seemed naught, if not with that form to live.
maiden over; all will be disastrous, unless we alone are privy to such
misdeed."
should obtain her whole heart and love.
burning, and bearing torches: thus was the way to pleasure closed.
all was sleeping; the good damsel's dog alone I found tied to the bed.
that I experienced, when that discreet maiden I strove to seduce:
contumely of every kind that wily girl heaped upon me; nor of that
damsel gained I aught.
wise conduct he should be, of good memory and ready speech; if much
knowledge he desires, he must often talk on good.
nature of the simple.
by silence; in many words I spoke to my advantage in Suttung's halls.
mead; a bad recompense I afterwards made her, for her whole soul, her
fervent love.
over and under me were the Jotun's ways: thus I my head did peril.
wise; for Odhrærir is now come up to men's earthly dwellings.
courts, had not Gunnlod aided me, that good damsel, over whom I laid
my arm.
of the High One, in the High One's hall: after Bolverk they inquired,
whether he with the gods were come, or Suttung had destroyed him?
trust? Suttung defrauded, of his drink bereft, and Gunnlod made to
weep!
of Urd I silent sat, I saw and meditated, I listened to men's words.
graving them were they silent, nor of sage counsels, at the High One's
hall. In the High One's hall. I thus heard say:
thou takest it. Rise not at night, unless to explore, or art compelled
to go out.
thou takest it. In an enchantress's embrace thou mayest not sleep, so
that in her arms she clasp thee.
prince's words; food thou wilt shun and human joys; sorrowful wilt
thou go to sleep.
converse.
provide thee well with food.
misfortunes; for from a bad man thou never wilt obtain a return for
thy good will.
tongue caused his death, and most unrighteously.
thou well canst trust, go oft to visit him; for with brushwood
over-grown, and with high grass, is the way that no one treads.
converse; and salutary speech learn while thou livest.
quarrel. Care gnaws the heart, if thou to no one canst thy whole mind
disclose.
witless fool;
for good; but a good man will bring thee favour by his praise.
all his mind. Everything is better than being with the deceitful. He
is not another's friend who ever says as he says.
worse man: often the better yields, when the worse strikes.
unless for thyself it be; for a shoe if ill made, or a shaft if
crooked, will call down evil on thee.
that injury as thy own; and give to thy foes no peace.
good give thee pleasure.
sons of men then become) that men may not fascinate thee.
must promise fair, and hold to it: no one turns from good if it can be
got.
thou most wary, and with another's wife; and thirdly, that thieves
delude thee not.
They often little know, who sit within, of what race they are who
come.
mingled; no one is so good that no failing attends him, nor so bad as
to be good for nothing.
the aged utter, oft from a shriveled hide discreet words issue; from
those whose skin is pendent and decked with scars, and who go
tottering among the vile.
thrust him; treat well the indigent; they will speak well of thee.
give a penny, or they will call down on thee every ill in thy limbs.
thee the power of earth; for earth is good against drink, fire for
distempers, the oak for constipation, a corn-ear for sorcery, a hall
for domestic strife. In bitter hates invoke the moon; the biter for
bite-injuries is good; but runes against calamity; fluid let earth
absorb.
rules and maxims, and stories of himself, some of them not very
consistent with our ideas of a supreme deity.]
the following three lines:--
Wit is needful
to him who travels far:
harm seldom befalls the wary:
They are printed in the Stockholm edition of the original Afzelius and
Bask, and in the Swedish translation by Afzelius.]
the version of Finn Magnusen.]
or Swedish origin, as the reindeer was unknown in Iceland before the
middle of the 18th century, when it was Introduced by royal command.]
extant; but compare the story of Odin and Rinda in Saxo, p. 126, edit.
Muller & Veleschow.]
bracelet, as with us on the Gospels, a sacred ring being kept in the
temple for the purpose.]
with a spear wounded, and to Odin offered, myself to myself; on that
tree, of which no one knows from what root it springs.
to runes applied myself, wailing learnt them, then fell down thence.
Bestla's sire, and a draught obtained of the precious mead, drawn from
Odhrærir.
and well thrive: word by word I sought out words, fact by fact I
sought out facts.
characters, very potent characters, which the great speaker depicted,
and the high powers formed, and the powers' prince graved:
the dwarfs, Asvid for the Jotuns: some I myself graved.
them? knowest thou how to depict them? knowest thou how to prove them?
knowest thou how to pray? knowest thou how to offer? knowest thou how
to send?[25] knowest thou how to consume?
to a return. 'Tis better not to send than too much consume. So Thund
graved before the origin of men, where he ascended, to whence he
afterwards came.
man. Help the first is called, for that will help thee against strifes
and cares.
as leeches live. * * * *
foes, the weapons' edge I deaden: of my adversaries nor arms nor wiles
harm aught.
sing that I can walk; the fetter starts from my feet, and the manacle
from my hands.
shaft flying amid the host, so swift it cannot fly that I cannot
arrest it, if only I get sight of it.
roots;[27] also if a man declares hatred to me, harm shall consume
them sooner than me.
inmates, so furiously it shall not burn that I cannot save it. That
song I can sing.
hatred grows among the sons of men--that I can quickly assuage.
to save, I can the wind on the waves allay, and the sea lull.
can so operate that they will forsake their own forms, and their own
minds.
to battle, under their shields I sing, and with power they go safe to
the fight, safe from the fight; safe on every side they go.
from a halter, I can so grave and in runes depict, that the man shall
walk, and with me converse.
he shall not fall, though he into battle come: that man shall not sink
before swords.
enumerate the gods, Æsir and Alfar, I know the distinctions of all.
This few unskilled can do.
Delling's doors. Strength he sang to the Æsir, and to the Alfar
prosperity, wisdom to Hroptatyr.
affection I desire to possess, the soul I change of the white-armed
damsel, and wholly turn her mind.
reluctantly avoid me. These songs, Loddfafnir! thou wilt long have
lacked; yet it may be good if thou understandest them, profitable if
thou learnest them.
wife of man, (all is better what one only knows. This is the closing
of the songs) save her alone who clasps me in her arms, or is my
sister.
the sons of men all-useful, but useless to the Jotuns' sons. Hail to
him who has sung them! Hail to him who knows them! May he profit who
has learnt them! Hail to those who have listened to them!
explanation which I am incompetent to afford. They have had many
interpreters and as many interpretations. The idea of Odin hanging on
a tree would seem to have been suggested by what we read of the grove
at Upsala, or Sigtuna, in which the victims offered to that deity were
suspended from the trees. In the guise of an unknown wanderer, Odin
may be supposed to have been captured and thus offered to himself. It
no doubt refers to some lost legend.]
missions.]
bear, in many instances, a remarkable similarity to those attributed
to him by Snorri.]
roots of trees were particularly fitted for hurtful trolldom, or
witchcraft, and that wounds caused thereby were mortal. In India a
similar superstition prevails of the hurtfulness of the roots of
trees.]
compotation, ere they the truth discovered.[28] Rods[29] they shook,
and blood inspected, when they found at Oegir's a lack of kettles.
Miskorblindi. In his eyes looked Ygg's son steadfastly. "Thou to the
Æsir shalt oft a compotation give."
meditated vengeance on the gods. Sif's husband he besought a kettle
him to bring, "in which I beer for all of you may brew."
powers it accomplish, till from true-heartedness, Ty to Hlorridi much
friendly counsel gave.
heaven's end. My sire, fierce of mood, a kettle owns, a capacious
cauldron, a rast in depth."
_Thor_.
_Ty_.
"Yes, friend! if we stratagem' employ." Rapidly they drove forward
that day from Asgard, till to the giant's home they came.
hall that Hymir owned. The son his granddam found to him most
loathful; heads she had nine hundred.
beer-cup to her son:
kettles place. My husband is oftentimes niggard towards guests, to
ill-humour prone."
from the chase. He the hall entered, the icebergs resounded, as the
churl approached; the thicket on his cheeks was frozen.
thy hall, whom we expected from his long journey; him accompanies our
famed adversary, the friend of man, who Veor hight.
the pillar stands before them." In shivers flew the pillar at the
Jotun's glance; the beam was first broken in two.
cauldron, whole from the column. The two came forth, but the old Jotun
with eyes surveyed his adversary.
sorrow on the floor coming. Then were three oxen taken, and the Jotun
bade them forthwith be boiled.
afterwards bore them. Sif's consort ate, ere to sleep he went,
completely, he alone, two of Hymir's beeves.
well large: "We three to-morrow night shall be compelled on what we
catch to live."
with baits supply: "To the herd betake thee, (if thou in thy courage
trustest, crusher of the rock-dwellers!) for baits to seek.
guest in haste to the forest went, where stood an all-black ox before
him.
horns. "To me thy work seems worse by far, ruler of keels! than if
thou hadst sat quiet."
farther out to move; but the Jotun declared his slight desire farther
to row.
but at the stern abaft Veor cunningly made him a line.
ox's head. Gaped at the bait the foe of gods, the encircler beneath of
every land.[30]
up to the side; with his hammer struck, on his foul head's summit,
like a rock towering, the wolf's own brother.
together: at length the fish back into ocean sank.[31]
powerful Hymir nothing spake, but the oar moved in another course.
the dwelling bear, or the boat fast bind?"
lifted the water-steed, together with its oars and scoop; bore to the
dwelling the Jotun's ocean-swine, the curved vessel, through the
wooded hills.
disputed, said that no one was strong, however vigorously he might
row, unless he his cup could break.
upright stone in twain; sitting dashed the cup through the pillars:
yet they brought it whole to Hymir back.
which she only knew: "Strike at the head of Hymir, the Jotun with food
oppressed, that is harder than any cup."
godlike power. Unhurt remained the old man's helm-block, but the round
wine-bearer was in shivers broken.
hurled from my knees." Thus the old man spake: "I can never say again,
beer thou art too hot.
dwelling." Ty twice assayed to move the vessel, yet at each time stood
the kettle fast.
dwelling's floor. Sif's consort lifted the kettle on his head, while
about his heels its rings jingled.
he from the caverns saw, with Hymir from the east, a troop of
many-headed monsters coming.
forth towards the savage crew, and slew all the mountain-giants, who
with Hymir had him pursued.
down half-dead before the car. It from the pole had sprung across the
trace; but the false Loki was of this the cause.
indemnity he from the giant got: he paid for it with his children
both.[32]
the kettle, which Hymir had possessed, out of which every god shall
beer with Oegir drink at every harvest-tide.
fright, took out his knife and severed Thor's line.]
beard he shook, his forehead struck, the son of earth felt all around
him;
now say, which no one knows anywhere on earth, nor in heaven above;
the As's hammer is stolen!"
of all said: "Wilt thou me, Freyia, thy feather-garment lend, that
perchance my hammer I may find?"
_Freyia._
to thee, though it were of silver."
Æsir's dwellings, and came within the Jotun's land.
plaiting gold bands and his horses' manes smoothing.
thou come alone to Jotunheim?"
_Loki_.
Hlorridi's hammer hidden?"
_Thrym_.
it shall no man get again, unless he bring me Freyia to wife."
Jotun's dwellings, and came within the Æsir's courts; there he met
Thor, in the middle court, who these words first of all uttered.
the long tidings. Oft of him who sits are the tales defective, and he
who lies down utters falsehood."
_Loki_.
Thursar's lord. It shall no man get again, unless he bring him Freyia
to wife."
all said: "Bind thee, Freyia, in bridal raiment, we two must drive to
Jotunheim."
hall beneath her trembled: in shivers flew the famed Brisinga
necklace. "Know me to be of women lewdest, if with thee I drive to
Jotunheim."
hold converse; and deliberated the mighty gods, how they Hlorridi's
hammer might get back.
other Vanir--"Let us clothe Thor with bridal raiment, let him have the
famed Brisinga necklace.
knees, but on his breast place precious stones, and a neat coif set on
his head."
if I let myself be clad in bridal raiment."
suchlike words: forthwith the Jotuns will Asgard inhabit, unless thy
hammer thou gettest back."
Brisinga necklace, let by his side keys jingle, and woman's weeds fall
round his knees; and on his breast placed precious stones, and a neat
coif set on his head.
we two will drive to Jotunheim."
traces; they had fast to run. The rocks were shivered, the earth was
in a blaze; Odin's son drove to Jotunheim.
benches deck, now they bring me Freyia to wife, Niord's daughter, from
Noatun.
for the Jotuns' joy. Treasures I have many, necklaces many, Freyia
alone seemed to me wanting."
brought forth. Thor alone an ox devoured, salmons eight, and all the
sweetmeats women should have. Sif's consort drank three salds of mead.
brides eat more voraciously? I never saw brides feed more amply, nor a
maiden drink more mead."
found against the Jotun's speech: "Freyia has nothing eaten for eight
nights, so eager was she for Jotunheim."
back along the hall. "Why are so piercing Freyia's looks? Methinks
that fire burns from her eyes."
found against the Jotun's speech: "Freyia for eight nights has not
slept, so eager was she for Jotunheim."
to ask: "Give me from thy hands the ruddy rings, if thou wouldst gain
my love, my love and favour all."
bride to consecrate; lay Miollnir on the maiden's knee; unite us each
with other by the hand of Vor."
his hammer recognized. He first slew Thrym, the Thursar's lord, and
the Jotun's race all crushed;
demanded; she a blow got instead of skillings, a hammer's stroke for
many rings. So got Odin's son his hammer back.
_Alvis_.
bend her way home. That beyond my strength I have hurried will to
every one appear: at home naught shall disturb my quiet.
_Vingthor_.
last night with corpses lain? To me thou seemst to bear resemblance to
the Thursar. Thou art not born to carry off a bride.
_Alvis_.
a place. The lord of chariots I am come to visit. A promise once
confirmed let no one break.[34]
_Vingthor_.
power. I was from home when the promise was given thee. Among the gods
I the sole giver am.
_Alvis_.
maiden? For far-reaching shafts few will know thee. Who has decked
thee with bracelets?
_Vingthor_.
with my dissent thou shalt not that young maiden have, nor that union
obtain.
_Alvis_.
would I possess than be without that snow-white maiden.
_Vingthor_.
thou of every world canst tell all I desire to know.
_Alvis_.
the dwarf to prove. All the nine worlds I have travelled over, and
every being known.
_Vingthor_.
to know--how the earth is called, which lies before the sons of men,
in every world.
_Alvis_.
call it vega, the Jotuns igroen, the Alfar groandi, the powers supreme
aur.
_Vingthor_.
perceptible in every world.
_Alvis_.
the Vanir call it, uppheimr the Jotuns, the Alfar fagraræfr, the
dwarfs driupansal.
_Vingthor_.
every world.
_Alvis_.
hvel in Hel[35] they call it, skyndi the Jotuns, but the dwarfs skin;
the Alfar name it artali.
_Vingthor_.
see in every world.
_Alvis_.
call it Dvalinn's leika, the Jotuns eyglo, the Alfar fagrahvel, the
Æsir's sons alskir.
_Vingthor_.
showers are mingled in every world.
_Alvis_.
call them vindflot, the Jotuns urvan, the Alfar vedrmegin; in Hel they
are called hialm hulids.
_Vingthor_.
passes over every world.
_Alvis_.
wide-ruling powers call it gneggiud, the Jotuns oepir, the Alfar
dynfari, in Hel they call it hvidudr.
_Vingthor_.
in every world.
_Alvis_.
vindslot, the Jotuns ofhly, the Alfar dagsevi, the Dwarfs call it dags
vera.
_Vingthor_.
in every world.
_Alvis_.
call it vagr, the Jotuns alheimr, the Alfar lagastafr, the Dwarfs call
it diupan mar.
_Vingthor_.
men's sons in every world.
_Alvis_.
vagr, the Jotuns frekr, but the Dwarfs forbrennir; in Hel they call it
hrodudr.
_Vingthor_.
the sons of men in every world.
_Alvis_.
inmates call it hlidthangr, the Jotuns eldi, the Alfar fagrlimi; the
Vanir call it vondr.
_Vingthor_.
daughter hight, in every world.
_Alvis_.
powers call it grima, the Jotuns olios, the Alfar svefngaman; the
Dwarfs call it draumniorunn.
_Vingthor_.
men sow in every world.
_Alvis_.
it vaxtr, the Jotuns æti, the Alfar lagastafr; in Hel 'tis hnipinn
called.
_Vingthor_.
men drink in every world.
_Alvis_.
veig, hreina logr the Jotuns, but in Hel 'tis called miodr: Suttung's
sons call it sumbl.
_Vingthor_.
wiles thou hast, I tell thee, been deluded. Thou art above ground,
dwarf! at dawn; already in the hall the sun is shining!
but of which the story is lost.]
was no longer regarded as a person, but as a place.]
Thor journeying from the eastern parts came to a strait or sound, on
the other side of which was a ferryman with his boat. Thor cried
out:--
_Harbard_.
_Thor_.
basket on my back: there is no better food: at my ease I ate, before I
quitted home, herrings and oats, with which I yet feel sated.
_Harbard_.
foreknowledge; for sad will be thy home: thy mother, I believe, is
dead.
_Thor_.
know--that my mother is dead.
_Harbard_.
bare-legged thou standest, and like a beggar clothed; thou hast not
even breeches.
_Thor_.
who owns this skiff, which by the strand thou holdest?
_Harbard_.
who dwells in Radso sound. Robbers he bade me not to ferry, or
horse-stealers, but good men only, and those whom I well knew. Tell me
then thy name, if thou wilt cross the sound.
_Thor_.
am Odin's son, Meili's brother, and Magni's sire, the gods' mighty
leader: With Thor thou here mayest speak. I will now ask how thou art
called.
_Harbard_.
_Thor_.
perpetrated?
_Harbard_.
my life against such as thou art; unless I death-doomed am.
_Thor_.
thee, and wet my garments: but I will pay thee, mannikin! for thy
sharp speeches, if o'er the sound I come.
_Harbard_.
stouter one since Hrungnir's death.
_Thor_.
stout-hearted Jotun, whose head was all of stone; yet I made him fall,
and sink before me. What meanwhile didst thou, Harbard?
_Harbard_.
Algron hight. There we could fight, and slaughter make, many perils
prove, indulge in love.
_Thor_.
_Harbard_.
had, had they but been kind. Of sand a rope they twisted, and from the
deep valley dug the earth: to them all I alone was superior in
cunning. I rested with the sisters seven, and their love and pleasures
shared. What meanwhile didst thou, Thor?
_Thor_.
Allvaldi's son into the heaven serene: they are signs the greatest of
my deeds. What meanwhile didst thou, Harbard?
_Harbard_.
when from their husbands I enticed them. A mighty Jotun I believed
Hlebard to be: a magic wand he gave me, but from his wits I charmed
him.
_Thor_.
such case is for self. What meanwhile didst thou, Thor?
_Thor_.
they to the mountain went. Great would have been the Jotun race, had
they all lived; and not a man left in Midgard. What meanwhile didst
thou, Harbard?
_Harbard_.
never reconciled. Odin has all the jarls that in conflict fall; but
Thor the race of thralls.
_Thor_.
but hadst the power.
_Harbard_.
and fear, thou wast crammed into a glove, and hardly thoughtest thou
wast Thor. Thou durst not then, through thy terror, either sneeze or
cough, lest Fialar it might hear.
_Thor_.
stretch my arm across the sound.
_Harbard_.
altogether no offence? But what didst thou, Thor?
_Thor_.
Svarang me assailed, and with stones pelted me, though in their
success they little joyed: they were the first to sue for peace. What
meanwhile didst thou, Harbard?
_Harbard_.
that fair I dallied, and long meetings had. I that gold-bright one
delighted; the game amused her.
_Thor_.
_Harbard_.
_Thor_.
_Harbard_.
betrayed it.
_Thor_.
_Harbard_.
_Thor_.
perpetrated, the whole people, had seduced.
_Harbard_.
_Thor_.
which with props I had secured, with iron clubs threatened me, and
drove away Thialfi. What meanwhile didst thou, Harbard?
_Harbard_.
lances to redden.
_Thor_.
to offer.
_Harbard_.
give, who wish to reconcile us.
_Thor_.
irritating?
_Harbard_.
woods.
_Thor_.
callest them, homes in the woods.
_Harbard_.
_Thor_.
ford. Louder than a wolf thou wilt howl, I trow, if of my hammer thou
gettest a touch.
_Harbard_.
thou shalt that arduous work perform; it will beseem thee better.
_Thor_.
annoying, thou dastardly varlet! I believe thou art lying.
_Harbard_.
wouldst have long since arrived, hadst thou assumed another form.
_Thor_.
_Harbard_.
retard.
_Thor_.
us cease from threats; approach the sire of Magni.
_Harbard_.
_Thor_.
water.
_Harbard_.
an hour, and to the stone another; then keep the left hand way, until
thou reachest Verland; there will Fiorgyn find her son Thor, and
point out to him his kinsmen's ways to Odin's land.
_Thor_.
_Harbard_.
which, I believe, is now nigh.
_Thor_.
only. For refusing to ferry me I will reward thee, if another time we
meet.
_Harbard_.
Frey, son of Niord; had one day seated himself in Hlidskialf, and was
looking over all regions, when turning his eyes to Jotunheim, he there
saw a beautiful girl, as she was passing from her father's dwelling to
her bower. Thereupon he became greatly troubled in mind. Frey's
attendant was named Skirnir; him Niord desired to speak with Frey;
when Skadi said:--
inquire with whom he so sage may be offended.
_Skirnir_.
him, and to inquire with whom he so sage may be offended.
_Skirnir_.
alone thou sittest in the spacious hall the livelong day?
_Frey_.
for the Alfs' illuminator shines every day, yet not for my pleasure.
_Skirnir_.
tell it; for in early days we were young together: well might we trust
each other.
_Frey_.
gave forth light wherewith shone all air and water.
days; yet will no one, Æsir or Alfar, that we together live.
_Skirnir_.
flickering flame, and that sword, which brandishes itself against the
Jotuns' race.
_Frey_.
flickering flame, and that sword, which will itself brandish, if he is
bold who raises it.
_Skirnir Speaks to the Horse_.
misty fells, over the Thursar's land: we shall both return, or the
all-potent Jotun will seize us both. Skirnir rides to Jotunheim, to
Gymir's mansion, where fierce dogs were chained at the gate of the
enclosure that was round Gymir's hall. He rides on to where a cowherd
was sitting on a mound, and says to him:
the ways, how I to the speech may come, of the young maiden, for
Gymir's dogs?
_Cowherd_.
wilt thou ever lack with the good maid of Gymir.
_Skirnir_.
to die: for one day was my age decreed, and my whole life determined.
_Gerd_.
our dwelling? The earth is shaken, and with it all the house of Gymir
trembles.
_A serving-maid_.
his steed browse on the grass.
_Gerd_.
although I fear it is my brother's slayer who waits without.
wise Vanir's? Why art thou come alone, through the hostile fire, our
halls to visit?
_Skirnir_.
Vanir's; yet I am come alone, through the hostile fire, your halls to
visit.
Gerd, thy love to gain, that thou mayest say that Frev to thee lives
dearest.
_Gerd_.
nor will I and Frey, while our lives last, live both together.
_Skirnir_.
son of Odin. Eight of equal weight will from it drop, every ninth
night.
_Gerd_.
the young son of Odin. I have no lack of gold in Gymir's courts; for
my father's wealth I share.
_Skirnir_.
which I have here in hand? I thy head will sever from thy neck, if
thou speakst not favourably to me.
_Gerd_.
foresee, if thou and Gymir meet, ye will eagerly engage in fight.
_Skirnir_.
which I have here in hand? Beneath its edge shall the old Jotun fall:
thy sire is death-doomed.
to my will. Thou shalt go thither, where the sons of men shall never
more behold thee.
towards Hel. Food shall to thee more loathsome be than is to any one
the glistening serpent among men.
at thee gaze, all beings at thee stare; more wide-known thou shalt
become than the watch among the gods,[37] if thou from thy gratings
gape.
grief augment. Set thee down, and I will tell thee of a whelming flood
of care, and a double grief.
courts. To the Hrimthursar's halls, thou shalt each day crawl
exhausted, joyless crawl; wail for pastime shalt thou have, and tears
and misery.
without a mate. Thy mind shall tear thee from morn to morn: as the
thistle thou shalt be which has thrust itself on the house-top.
get. A magic wand I got.
Frey shall loathe thee, even ere thou, wicked maid! shalt have felt
the gods' dire vengeance.
Æsir's friends! how I forbid, how I prohibit man's joy unto the
damsel, man's converse to the damsel.
grating of the dead beneath; there shall wretched thralls, from the
tree's roots, goats' water give thee. Other drink shalt thou, maiden!
never get, either for thy pleasure, or for my pleasure.
oedi, and othola. So will I cut them out, as I have cut them, in, if
there need shall be.
_Gerd_.
old mead; although I thought not that I ever should love one of Vanir
race.
_Skirnir_.
converse hold with the powerful son of Niord?
_Gerd_.
tranquil paths. Nine nights hence, there to Niord's son Gerd will
grant delight.
Skimir then rode home. Frey was standing without, and spoke to him,
asking tidings:
hence thou goest, what thou hast accomplished in Jotunheim, for my
pleasure or thine?
_Skirnir_.
tranquil paths. Nine nights hence, there to Niord's son Gerd will
grant delight.
_Frey_.
endure. Often a month to me less has seemed than half a night of
longing.
In ancient Sagas it is related that one of the Æsir named Heimdall,
being on a journey to a certain sea-shore, came to a village, where he
called himself Rig. In accordance with this Saga is the following:
and upright sagacious As, the strong and active Rig, his onward course
pursuing.
stood ajar, he went in, fire was on the floor. The man and wife sat
there, hoary-haired, by the hearth, Ai and Edda, in old guise clad.
middle seat, having on either side the domestic pair.
bran mixed; more besides she laid on the middle of the board; there in
a bowl was broth on the table set, there was a calf boiled, of cates
most excellent.
them both; laid him down in the middle of the bed; the domestic pair
lay one on either side.
mid-way. Nine months then passed way.
skin, and named it Thræl.
shriveled, the knuckles knotty, * * * and the fingers thick; a hideous
countenance it had, a curved back, and protruding heels.
loads; then faggots carried home, the livelong day.
foot-soles, her arms sunburnt, her nose compressed, her name was Thy.
son. They spoke and whispered, prepared a bed, Thræl and Thy, and days
of care.
were Hreimr and Fiosnir, Klur and Kleggi, Kefsir, Fulnir, Drumb,
Digraldi, Drott and Hosvir, Lut and Leggialdi. Fences they erected,
fields manured, tended swine, kept goats, dug turf.
Ysia and Ambatt, Eikintiasna, Totrughypia, and Tronubeina, whence are
sprung the race of thralls.
door stood ajar: he went in; fire was on the floor, man and wife sat
there engaged at work.
trimmed, a lock was on his forehead, his shirt close; his chest stood
on the floor.
prepared for clothing. A hood was on her head, a loose sark over her
breast, a kerchief round her neck, studs on her shoulders. Afi and
Amma owned the house.
prepared to sleep; laid him down in the middle of the bed, the
domestic pair lay one on either side.
passed away. Amma a child brought forth, they with water sprinkled it,
and called it Karl. The mother in linen swathed the ruddy redhead: its
eyes twinkled.
plough, houses build, and barns construct, make carts, and the plough
drive.
kirtle; married her to Karl. Snor was her name, under a veil she sat.
The couple dwelt together, rings exchanged, spread couches, and a
household formed.
were named, Held, Thegn, Smith, Breidr-bondi, Bundinskegg, Bui and
Boddi, Brattskegg and Segg.
Brud, Svanni, Svarri, Sprakki, Fliod, Sprund, and Vif, Feima, Ristil;
whence are sprung the races of churls.
the entrance looked southward, the door was half closed, a ring was on
the door-post.
other, Fadir and Modir, with fingers playing.
arrow-shafts prepared; but the housewife looked on her arms, smoothed
her veil, and her sleeves fastened;
robe, her sark was blue; brighter was her brow, her breast fairer, her
neck whiter than driven snow.
middle seat, having on either side the domestic pair.
decked. She then took thin cakes of snow-white wheat, and on the table
laid.
game and pork, and roasted birds. In a can was wine; the cups were
ornamented. They drank and talked; the day was fast departing, Rig
would counsel give to them both.
nights together, then departed on the mid-way. Nine months after that
passed away.
water sprinkled him, and named him Jarl. Light was his hair, bright
his cheeks, his eyes piercing as a young serpent's.
the string, the bow to bend, arrows to shaft, javelins to hurl,
spears to brandish, horses to ride, dogs to let slip, swords to draw,
swimming to practise.
taught him, his own name gave him, and his own son declared him, whom
he bade possess his alodial fields, his alodial fields, his ancient
dwellings.
till to a hall he came. His spear he brandished, his shield he shook,
made his horse curvet, and his falchion drew, strife began to raise,
the field to redden, carnage to make; and conquer lands.
to all treasures and precious things; lank-sided horses, rings he
dispersed, and collars cut in pieces.[39]
Hersir dwelt; there they found a slender maiden, fair and elegant,
Erna her name.
she under the linen[40] went. They together lived, and well throve,
had offspring, and old age enjoyed.
Nid and Nidjung. They learned games; Son and Svein swam and at tables
played. One was named Kund, Kon was youngest.
cut arrows, brandished spears.
he moreover knew men to preserve, edges to deaden, the sea to calm.
quench; sorrows to allay. He of eight men had the strength and energy.
superior proved; then acquired Rig to be called, and skilled in runes.
darts, and tamed birds.
young Kon: tame the birds? rather shouldst thou, young Kon! on horses
ride * * * and armies overcome.
than ye had. They well knew how the keel to ride, the edge to prove,
wounds to inflict.
The rest is wanting.
Oegir, who is also named Gymir, had brewed beer for the Æsir, after he
had got the great kettle, as has been already related. To the
entertainment came Odin and his wife Frigg. Thor did not come, being
in the East, but his wife Sif was there, also Bragi and his wife Idun,
and Ty, who was one-handed, Fenrisulf having bitten off his hand while
being bound. Besides these there were Niord and his wife Skadi, Frey
and Freyia, and Odin's son Vidar. Loki too was there, and Frey's
attendants, Byggvir and Beyla. Many other Æsir and Alfar were also
present.
Oegir had two servants, Fimafeng and Eldir. Bright gold was there used
instead of fire-light. The beer served itself to the guests. The place
was a great sanctuary. The guests greatly praised the excellence of
Oegir's servants. This Loki could not hear with patience, and so slew
Fimafeng; whereupon the Æsir shook their shields, exclaimed against
Loki, chased him into the forest, and then returned to drink. Loki
came again, and found Eldir standing without, whom he thus addressed:
what converse the sons of the triumphant gods at their potation?
_Eldir_.
the triumphant gods. Of the Æsir and the Alfar that are here within
not one has a friendly word for thee.
_Loki_.
hate to the Æsir's sons I bear, and will mix their mead with bale.
_Eldir_.
compotation, but contumely and clamour pourest forth on the kindly
powers, they will wipe it all off on thee?
_Loki_.
contend, I shall be rich in answers, if thou sayest too much?
Loki then went into the hall, but when those present saw who was come
in, they all sat silent.
_Loki_.
beseech the Æsir one draught to give me of the bright mead.
seat and place choose for me at your board, or bid me hie me hence.
_Bragi_.
board; for well the Æsir know for whom they ought to hold a joyous
compotation.
_Loki_.
together? When to taste beer thou didst constantly refuse, unless to
both 'twas offered?
_Odin_.
that Loki may not utter words of contumely in Oegir's hall.
Vidar then rising, presented Loki with drink, who before drinking thus
addressed the Æsir:
one As, who sits within there, Bragi, on yonder bench.
_Bragi_.
with a ring reward thee, if thou the Æsir wilt not requite with
malice. Provoke not the gods against thee.
_Loki_.
Æsir and the Alfar, that are here present, in conflict thou art the
most backward, and in the play of darts most timid.
_Bragi_.
Oegir, I thy head would bear in my hand, and so for lying punish thee.
_Loki_.
be, Bragi, the bench's pride! Go and fight, if thou art angry; a brave
man sits not considering.
_Idun_.
adopted sons, and to Loki speak not in reproachful words, in Oegir's
hall.
_Loki_.
since thou thy arms, carefully washed, didst twine round thy brother's
murderer.
_Idun_.
Bragi I soothe, by beer excited. I desire not that angry ye fight.
_Gefion_.
words? Lopt perceives not that he is deluded, and is urged on by fate.
_Loki_.
thy mind corrupted, who thee a necklace gave, and around whom thou thy
limbs didst twine?
_Odin_.
Gefion's anger on thee; for all men's destinies, I ween, she knows as
thoroughly as I do.
_Loki_.
oft hast thou given to those to whom thou oughtest not--victory to
cowards.
_Odin_.
cowards? Thou wast eight winters on the earth below, a milch cow and a
woman, and didst there bear children. Now that, methinks, betokens a
base nature.
_Loki_.
knocked at houses as a Vala. In likeness of a fortune teller, thou
wentest among people. Now that, methinks, betokens a base nature.
_Frigg_.
twain, did in days of yore. Ever forgotten be men's former deeds!
_Loki_.
hast been fond of men, since Ve and Vili, it is said, thou, Vidrir's
wife, didst both to thy bosom take.
_Frigg_.
thou shouldst not go from the Æsir's sons: thou should'st have been
fiercely assailed.
_Loki_.
the cause that thou seest not Baldr riding to the halls.
_Freyia_.
believe, knows all that happens, although she says it not.
_Loki_.
from vices: of the Æsir and the Alfar, that are herein, each has been
thy paramour.
_Freyia_.
to thee. Wroth with thee are the Æsir, and the Asyniur. Sad shalt thou
home depart.
_Loki_.
blended; since against thy brother thou the gentle powers excited. And
then, Freyia! what didst thou do?
_Niord_.
husbands, lovers; but 'tis a wonder that a wretched As, that has borne
children, should herein enter.
_Loki_.
the gods. Hymir's daughters had thee for an utensil, and flowed into
thy mouth.[41] _Niord_.
from the gods, that I had a son, whom no one hates, and accounted is a
chief among the Æsir.
_Loki_.
keep it secret: it was with thy sister thou hadst such a son; hardly
worse than thyself.
_Ty_.
maid he makes to weep, no wife of man, and from bonds looses all.
_Loki_.
thy right hand also I must mention make, which Fenrir from thee tore.
_Ty_.
of either. Nor is the wolf at ease: he in bonds must bide, until the
gods' destruction.
_Loki_.
rag nor penny ever hadst thou, poor wretch! for this injury.
_Frey_.
swept away. So shalt thou be bound, if thou art not silent, thou
framer of evil.
_Loki_.
thy sword: but when Muspell's sons through the dark forest ride, thou,
unhappy, wilt not have wherewith to fight.
_Byggvir_.
fair a dwelling, than marrow softer I would bray that ill-boding crow,
and crush him limb by limb.
_Loki_.
eagerly? At the ears of Frey thou shouldst ever be, and clatter under
mills.
_Byggvir_.
therefore am I joyful here, that all the sons of Hropt drink beer
together.
_Loki_.
when, lying in thy truckle bed, thou wast not to be found, while men
were fighting.
_Heimdall_.
leave off, Loki? But drunkenness so rules every man, that he knows not
of his garrulity.
_Loki_.
life decreed: with a wet back thou must ever be, and keep watch as
guardian of the gods.
_Skadi_.
tail; for thee, on a rock's point, with the entrails of thy ice-cold
son, the gods will bind.
_Loki_.
son, the gods will bind me, that first and foremost I was at the
slaying, when we assailed Thiassi.
_Skadi_.
assailed Thiassi, that from my dwellings and fields shall to thee ever
cold counsels come.
_Loki_.
didst invite me. Such matters must be mentioned, if we accurately must
recount our vices.
Then came Sif forth, and poured out mead for Loki in an icy cup,
saying:
at least me alone, among the blameless Æsir race, leave stainless.
He took the horn, drank, and said:
towards thy mate; but one I know, and, I think, know him well, a
favoured rival of Hlorridi, and that is the wily Loki.
_Beyla_.
He will bid be quiet him who here insults all gods and men.
_Loki_.
mingled: never came a greater monster among the Æsir's sons. Thou art
a dirty strumpet.
Thor then came in and said:
stop thy prating. I will thy head from thy neck strike; then will thy
life be ended.
_Loki_.
Thor? Thou wilt not dare do so, when with the wolf thou hast to fight,
and he the all-powerful father swallows whole.
_Thor_.
stop thy prating. Up I will hurl thee to the east region, and none
shall see thee after.
_Loki_.
since in a glove-thumb thou, Einheri! wast doubled up, and hardly
thoughtest thou wast Thor.
_Thor_.
stop thy prating: with this right hand I, Hrungnir's bane, will smite
thee, so that thy every bone be broken.
_Loki_.
thou dost threaten me. Skrymir's thongs seemed to thee hard, when at
the food thou couldst not get, when, in full health, of hunger dying.
_Thor_.
stop thy prating. Hrungnir's bane shall cast thee down to Hel, beneath
the gratings of the dead.
_Loki_.
that which my mind suggested: but for thee alone will I go out;
because I know that thou wilt fight.
compotation hold. All thy possessions, which are herein, flame shall
play over, and on thy back shall burn thee.
After this Loki, in the likeness of a salmon, cast himself into the
waterfall of Franangr, where the Æsir caught him, and bound him with
the entrails of his son Nari; but his other son, Narfi, was changed
into a wolf. Skadi took a venomous serpent, and fastened it up over
Loki's face. The venom trickled down from it. Sigyn, Loki's wife, sat
by, and held a basin under the venom; and when the basin was full,
carried the venom out. Meanwhile the venom dropped on Loki, who shrank
from it so violently that the whole earth trembled. This causes what
are now called earthquakes.
perversion, by the poet, of what we know of Niord's history.]
giant race.
_Fiolsvith_.
Along the humid ways haste thee back hence, here, wretch! is no place
for thee.
round the perilous flame? Whom dost thou seek? Of what art thou in
quest? Or what, friendless being! desirest thou to know?
_Wanderer_.
wayfarer offers not hospitality? Void of honest fame, prattler! hast
thou lived: but hence hie thee home.
_Fiolsvith_.
prodigal. Within these courts thou shalt never come: so now, wretch!
take thyself off.
_Wanderer_.
something pleasant to be seen. These walls, methinks, shine around
golden halls. Here I could live contented with my lot.
_Fiolsvith_.
sprung.
_Wanderer_.
Fiolkald.
know: who here holds sway, and has power over these lands and costly
halls?
_Fiolsvith_.
son. She here holds sway, and has power over these lands and costly
halls.
_Vindkald_.
among the gods mortals never saw a greater artifice?
_Fiolsvith_.
it: a fetter fastens, every wayfarer, who lifts it from its opening.
_Vindkald_.
which among the gods mortals never saw a greater artifice?
_Fiolsvith_.
limbs. I have so supported it, that it will ever stand while the world
lasts.
_Vindkald_.
away the giantesses, and safety to the fields restore?
_Fiolsvith_.
know. Eleven watches they will keep, until the powers perish.
_Vindkald_.
fierce assailants sleep?
_Fiolsvith_.
watch they were appointed. One sleeps by night, by day the other, so
that no wight can enter if he comes.
_Vindkald_.
get, such that they can run in while they eat?
_Fiolsvith_.
that is alone such food as men can give them and run in while they
eat.
_Vindkald_.
branches spreads itself over every land?
_Fiolsvith_.
springs: it by that will fall which fewest know. Nor fire nor iron
will harm it.
_Vindkald_.
tree applied, which nor fire nor iron will harm?
_Fiolsvith_.
then will pass what would in remain: so is it a creator of mankind.
_Vindkald_.
that lofty tree, and all-glittering is with gold?
_Fiolsvith_.
of Mima's tree: afflictions only brings, together indissoluble, the
swart bird at his lonely meal.
_Vindkald_.
which Vidofnir may fall to Hel's abode?
_Fiolsvith_.
gate of Death. In an iron chest it lies with Sinmoera, and is with
nine strong locks secured.
_Vindkald_.
seeks after, and will take, that rod?
_Fiolsvith_.
bears that which few possess to the dame of the glassy clay.
_Vindkald_.
mortals can obtain, at which the pale giantess will rejoice?
_Fiolsvith_.
shalt bear, and to Sinmoera give, before she will think fit to lend an
arm for conflict.
_Vindkald_.
girt round with a curious flickering flame?
_Fiolsvith_.
point. This sumptuous house shall, for ages hence, be but from hearsay
known.
_Vindkald_.
constructed, which within the court I saw?
_Fiolsvith_.
Delling and Atvard, Lidskialf, Loki.
_Vindkald_.
see a splendid maiden stand?
_Fiolsvith_.
bowed-down and sorrowful: each woman becomes healthy, although a
year's disease she have, if she can but ascend it.
_Vindkald_.
Menglod's knees in harmony together?
_Fiolsvith_.
Thiodvarta, Biort and Blid, Blidr, Frid, Eir and Orboda.
_Vindkald_.
to them, if it should, be needful?
_Fiolsvith_.
pestilence so great shall come to the sons of men, but they will free
each from peril.
_Vindkald_.
Menglod's soft arms sleep?
_Fiolsvith_.
Svipdag; to him the sun-bright maid is for wife betrothed.
_Vindkald_.
Svipdag see; but yet go learn if Menglod will accept my love.
_Fiolsvith_.
the dogs rejoice; the house has itself opened. I think it must be
Svipdag.
_Menglod_.
thou art lying, that hither from afar is come the youth unto my halls.
kindred call thee? Of thy race and name I must have a token, if I was
betrothed to thee.
_Svipdag_.
winds on the cold ways drove me. Urd's decree may no one gainsay,
however lightly uttered.
_Menglod_.
follow. A sight unlooked-for gladdens most persons, when one the other
loves.
Now that is come to pass which I have hoped, that thou, dear youth,
again to my halls art come.
_Svipdag_.
affection. Now it is certain, that we shall pass our lives together.
Freyia rides with her favourite Ottar to Hyndla, a Vala, for the
purpose of obtaining information respecting Ottar's genealogy, such
information being required by him in a legal dispute with Angantyr.
Having obtained this, Freyia further requests Hyndla to give Ottar a
potion (minnisol) that will enable him to remember all that has been
told him. This she refuses, but is forced to comply by Freyia having
encircled her cave with flames. She gives him the potion, but
accompanied by a malediction, which is by Freyia turned to a blessing.
_Freyia_.
cavern dwellest. Now there is dark of darks; we will both to Valhall
ride, and to the holy fane.
grants gold to the deserving. He gave to Hermod a helm and corslet,
and from him Sigmund a sword received.
the great, and to men, wit; fair wind he gives to traders, but poesy
to skallds; valour he gives to many a warrior.
be well disposed; although he bears ill will to Jotun females.
runic rein.[42] _Hyndla_.
_Freyia_.
_Hyndla_.
it, so fixed upon us; while thou thy man hast on the dead-road,[43]
the young Ottar, Innstein's son.
that my man is on the dead-road with me; there where my hog sparkles
with its golden bristles, hight Hildisvini, which for me made the two
skilful dwarfs, Dain and Nabbi. From the saddle we will talk: let us
sit, and of princely families discourse, of those chieftains who from
the gods descend. They have contested for the dead's gold, Ottar the
young and Angantyr.
heritage may have, after his kindred.
that stone as glass become. With the blood of oxen he newly sprinkled
it. Ottar ever trusted in the Asyniur.
exalted men. Who are the Skioldungs? Who are the Skilfings? Who the
Odlings? Who the Ylfings? Who the hold-born? Who the hers-born? The
choicest race of men under heaven?
_Hyndla_.
Old, Alf was from Ulf, Ulf from Sæfari, but Sæfari from Svan the Red.
was named Hledis the priestess; Frodi her father was, and her mother
Friant: all that stock is reckoned among chieftains.
highest of the Skioldungs; (Famed were the wars by those chieftains
led) his deeds seemed to soar to the skirts of heaven.
steel. He Almveig had to wife, first of women. They begat and had
eighteen sons.
Odlings, from them the Ynglings, from them the hold-born, from them
the hers-born, the choicest race of men under heaven. All that race is
thine, Ottar Heimski!
race is thine, Ottar Heimski! Carest thou this to know? Wishest thou a
longer narrative?
noble champions, Fradmar, Gyrd, and the Frekis both, Am, Josur, Mar,
Alf the Old. Carest thou this to know? Wishest thou a longer
narrative?
grandsire of thy mother. Then was Frodi yet before Kari, but the
eldest born was Alf.
kinsman, ancient is that kinship. I knew both Brodd and Horfi. All
that race is thine, Ottar Heimski!
thou shalt yet count chieftains many. All that race is thine, Ottar
Heimski!
Bui and Brami, Barri and Reifnir, Tind and Hyrfing, the two Haddingis.
All that race is thine, Ottar Heimski!
ferocious berserkir, calamity of every kind, by land and sea, like
fire they carried. All that race is thine, Ottar Heimski!
Old; all descended from Jormunrek, son-in-law of Sigurd. (Listen to my
story) the dread of nations, him who Fafnir slew.
but Eylimi from the Odlings. All that race is thine, Ottar Heimski!
sister. Guttorm; was not of Giuki's race, although he brother was of
them both. All that race is thine, Ottar Heimski!
of Aud, Aud the rich was Ivar's daughter; but Radbard was Randver's
father. They were heroes to the gods devoted. All that race is thine,
Ottar Heimski!
laid; him Vali showed himself worthy to avenge, his own brother: he
the slayer slew. All that race is thine, Ottar Heimski!
Gymir's daughter, from Jotuns sprung and Aurboda; Thiassi also was
their relation, that haughty Jotun; Skadi was his daughter.
to know. Wishest thou yet a longer narrative?
Hvedna's father; Heid and Hrossthiof were of Hrimnir's race.
Vilmeidr, all the sorcerers from Svarthofdi; all the Jotuns come from
Ymir.
to know. Wishest thou yet a longer narrative?
endowed, of origin divine: nine Jotun maids gave birth to the gracious
god, at the world's margin.
birth, and Angeia; Ulfrun gave him birth, and Eyrgiafa, Imd and Atla,
and Jarnsaxa.
ice-cold sea, and with Son's blood. We tell thee much, and more
remember. I admonish thee thus much to know. Wishest thou a yet longer
narrative?
Svadilfari: one monster seemed of all most deadly, which from
Byleist's brother sprang.
half-burnt woman's heart. Loki became guileful from that wicked woman;
thence in the world are all giantesses come.
the air is rent: thence come snows and rapid winds; then it is decreed
that the rain should cease.
the strength of earth; he was declared a ruler, mightiest and richest,
allied by kinship to all princes.
name declare. Few may see further forth than when Odin meets the wolf.
_Freyia_.
words repeat of this, discourse, on the third morn, when he and
Angantyr reckon up races.
_Hyndla_.
power thou gettest not from me. Thou runnest, my hot friend, out at
nights, as among he-goats the she-goat goes.
under thy girdle. Thou runnest, my hot friend, out at nights, as among
he-goats, the she-goat goes.
_Freyia_.
not ever away from hence.
_Hyndla_.
lives to save. Bear thou the cup to Ottar's hand, the mead with venom
mingled, in an evil hour!
_Freyia_.
dost evil threaten. He shall drink delicious draughts. All the gods I
pray to favour Ottar.
_Son_.
thee! if thou rememberest, that thou thy son badest to thy grave-mound
to come.
_Mother_.
burthened, that thou thy mother callest, who to dust is come, and from
human homes departed?
_Son_.
has father in his bosom cherished, when thou badest me go no one knows
whither, Menglod to meet.
_Mother_.
If it so fall out, that thou thy will obtainest, the event must then
be as it may.
_Son_.
my way I fear to be. I seem too young in years.
_Mother_.
Rind sang to Ran; that from thy shoulders thou shouldst cast what to
thee seems irksome: let thyself thyself direct.
thy ways. May Urd's protection hold thee on every side, where thou
seest turpitude.
peril fall, Horn and Rud, may they flow down to Hel, and for thee ever
be diminished.
dangerous road, their hearts shall fail them, and to thee be power,
and their minds to peace be turned.
friendly spells I will let on thy joints be sung, and the lock from
thy arms shall start, [and from thy feet the fetter].
stormy than men have known it, air and water shall in a bag attend
thee, and a tranquil course afford thee.
should assail thee, deadly cold shall not thy carcase injure, nor draw
thy body to thy limbs.
on the misty way, that the dead Christian woman no power may have to
do thee harm.
Jotun thou words exchangest, of words and wit to thy mindful heart
abundance shall be given.
thy wishes. On a stone fast in the earth I have stood within the door,
while songs I sang to thee.
them dwell; for happiness abundant shalt thou have in life, while of
my words thou art mindful.
This singular poem, the authorship of which is, in some manuscripts,
assigned to Sæmund himself, may be termed a Voice from the Dead, given
under the form of a dream, in which a deceased father is supposed to
address his son from another world. The first 7 strophes seem hardly
connected with the following ones, which, as far as the 32nd consist
chiefly in aphorisms with examples, some closely resembling those in
the Havamal. In the remaining portion is given the recital of the last
illness of the supposed speaker, his death, and the scenes his soul
passed through on the way to its final home.
The composition exhibits a strange mixture of Christianity and
Heathenism, whence it would seem that the poet's own religion was in a
transition state. Of the allusions to Heathenism it is, however, to be
observed that they are chiefly to persons and actions of which there
is no trace in the Odinic mythology, as known to us, and are possibly
the fruits of the poet's own imagination. The title of the poem is no
doubt derived from the allusion to the Sun at the beginning of
strophes 39-45.
For an elaborate and learned commentary, with an interlinear version
of "the Song of the Sun," the reader may consult "Les Chants de Sol,"
by Professor Bergmann, Strasbourg & Paris, 1858.
the ways beset by him might no one living pass.
until weary, and with failing strength, a wandering guest came from
the way.
with trembling heart he seemed to trust him who had been so
evil-minded.
on God he thought, the traveller's wants supplied; for he felt he was
an evil-doer.
treated; his sin within him swelled, he while sleeping murdered his
wary cautious host.
but he was doomed the sins of him on himself to take, whom sackless he
had slain.
a life of purity it shall ever live with the almighty God.
him. To many that befalls which they least expect. No one may command
his tranquillity.
them, yet naked they became, and of all bereft, and, like wolves, ran
to the forest.
caused by women; pernicious they become, although the mighty God them
pure created.
other be, until to frenzy they were driven for a woman: she was
destined for their perdition.
joyous days; no other thing could they in memory bear than that bright
form.
enjoy: but from that anguish rose hate intense between the faithful
friends.
they went,[44] for that fair woman, and each one found his death.
who follow her, for the most part, turn from God.
well-being; now they sit and turn their sores to various hearths.
above all people; but their lot Almighty God was pleased otherwise to
appoint.
sport. Now they are requited, so that they must walk between frost and
fire.
promise them good: 'tis good to have another's injury as a warning.
Vigolf's power; he confidently trusted him, his brother's murderer,
but he proved false.
promised him gold, feigned themselves friends, while they together
drank; but then came forth their guile.
they with swords wounded him who sackless was, and let his life go
forth.
into a well, and would it hide; but the holy Lord beheld from heaven.
the evil doers will, I wean, late be from torments called.
spirit: for a week after, all shall then go happily, according to thy
will.
evil: the weeping thou shalt soothe with benefits: that is salutary to
the soul.
created. Greatly sinful is every man who late finds the Father.
which is lacking: of all things may be destitute he who for nothing
asks: few heed the wants of the silent.
thitherward I yearn; for it was promised me, he who craves it shall of
the feast partake.
one stands in dread, if he does no evil: good it is to be blameless.
will prove who has to go through ways strewed with gleeds.
thee: consider thou them well, and forget them never: they are all
useful to learn.
secondly, how the sons of men reluctantly become corpses.
crave; shining riches at last become a sorrow: many have riches driven
to madness.
our worldly sojourn has the Lord created in delights abounding.
but He prevailed who was all-powerful: onward are the ways of the
doomed.
them, but they were strong. 'Tis easy free to go.
Hel each eve with horror bade me to their home.
Hel's grated doors on the other side I heard heavily creaking.
this world declining) mightier she appeared, in many ways, than she
was before.
bowed before her, for the last time, in the world of men.
know; but Gioll's streams roared from the other side mingled much with
blood.
my heart in great measure was dissolved in languor.
declined: my tongue was as wood become, and all was cold without me.
mountain-waters closed over me, and I went called from torments.
high it flew, settled nowhere, so that it might find rest.
lay; then becomes manifest the divine word: "Man is the same as
earth."
and earth) how forsaken many go hence, although from kindred parted.
my wealth bereft, to me was destined a bed strewed with sand.
much: water of baths was of all things to me most loathsome.
horse: there the giantess's sun shone grimly through the dripping
clouds of heaven.
worlds: up and down, I sought an easier way, where I might have the
readiest paths.
of torment came:--scorched birds, which were souls, flew numerous as
flies.
obscure: their wings they shook; wide around me seemed the earth and
heaven to burst.
together led: his feet stood on the earth, but his horns reached up to
heaven.
all: from full horns, the pure mead they drank from the heaven-god's
well.
heard a doleful sound: for their husbands false-faced women ground
earth for food.
hung out of their breasts, faint with much affliction.
faces seemed to me all reddened with reeking blood.
have; heathen stars stood above their heads, painted with deadly
characters.
bloody runes were on their breasts graved painfully.
this he earns, who by this world's vices is infatuated.
property: in shoals they went to Castle-covetous, and burthens bore of
lead.
through the breasts of those men passed strong venomous serpents.
were on hot stones firmly nailed.
their garments ludicrously were in fire enveloped.
Hel's ravens from their heads their eyes miserably tore.
suffer. Pleasant sins end in painful penalties: pains ever follow
pleasure.
were above their heads brightly burning.
angels, read holy books above their heads.
God's angels bowed before them: that is the highest joy.
their couches were on the rays of heaven pleasantly placed.
who for a long time had themselves tormented.
God: men guided them who had been murdered wholly without crime.
pray, who hast us all created; free us all from miseries.
iron gore falls from their nostrils, which kindles hate among men.
sails are reefed late, which on the ropes of desire are hung.
thee that horn of hart, which from the grave-mound bore the wise
Vigdvalin.
Radvor the eldest, and the youngest Kreppvor, and their seven sisters.
bloodshed they have excited, and wounds have sucked, after an evil
custom.
sing, the Sun-Song, which will appear in many parts no fiction.
rejoicing. Oh Lord! unto the dead grant peace, and to the living
comfort.
the truth: no man has been so wise created that has before heard the
Sun-song.
such encounters being called a _holm_, consisting of a circular space
marked out by stones.]
There was a king in Sweden named Nidud: he had two sons and a
daughter, whose name was Bodvild. There were three brothers, sons of a
king of the Finns, one was called Slagfid, the second Egil, the third
Volund. They went on snow-shoes and hunted wild-beasts. They came to
Ulfdal, and there made themselves a house, where there is a water
called Ulfsiar. Early one morning they found on the border of the lake
three females sitting and spinning flax. Near them lay their
swan-plumages: they were Valkyriur. Two of them, Hladgud-Svanhvit and
Hervor-Alvit, were daughters of King Hlodver; the third was Olrun, a
daughter of Kiar of Valland. They took them home with them to their
dwelling. Egil had Olrun, Slagfid Svanhvit, and Volund Alvit. They
lived there seven years, when they flew away seeking conflicts, and
did not return. Egil then went on snow-shoes in search of Olrun, and
Slagfid in search of Svanhvit, but Volund remained in Ulfdal. He was a
most skilful man, as we learn from old traditions. King Nidud ordered
him to be seized, so as it is here related.
young, fate to fulfil. On the lake's margin they sat to repose, the
southern damsels; precious flax they spun.
clasped. Svanhvit was the second, she a swan's plumage bore; but the
third, their sister, the white neck clasped of Volund.
with longing seized; and in the ninth fate parted them. The maidens
yearned for the murky wood, the young Alvit, fate to fulfil.
their house deserted, went out and in, and looked around. Egil went
east after Olrun, and Slagfid west after Svanhvit;
hard gem, well fastened all the rings on linden bast, and so awaited
his bright consort, if to him she would return.
remained in Ulfdal. In the night went men, in studded corslets, their
shields glistened in the waning moon.
went in through the house. On the bast they saw the rings all drawn,
seven hundred, which the warrior owned.
they bore away. Came then from the chase the ardent hunter, Volund,
gliding[45] on the long way.
brushwood, and the arid fir, the wind-dried wood, before Volund.
one was missing. He thought that Hlodver's daughter had it, the young
Alvit, and that she was returned.
his hands he felt heavy constraints, and round his feet fetters
clasped.
and me have bound?"
Volund! Alfars' chief![46] our gold, in Ulfdal?"
the hills of Rhine. I mind me that we more treasures possessed, when,
a whole family, we were at home.
daughter, she entered into the house, stood on the floor, her voice
moderated: Now is he not mirthful, who from the forest comes."
King Nidud gave to his daughter Bodvild the ring which had been taken
from the bast in Volund's house; but he himself bore the sword that
had belonged to Volund. The queen said:
he recognizes: threatening are his eyes as a glistening serpent's: let
be severed his sinews' strength; and set him then in Sævarstad.
This was done; he was hamstrung, and then set on a certain small
island near the shore, called Sævarstad. He there forged for the king
all kinds of jewellery work. No one was allowed to go to him, except
the king. Volund said:
most skilfully, and tempered, as seemed to me most cunningly. That
bright blade forever is taken from me: never shall I see it borne into
Volund's smithy.
no indemnity." He sat and never slept, and his hammer plied; but much
more speedy vengeance devised on Nidud.
Sævarstad. To the chest they came, for the keys asked; manifest was
their grudge, when therein they looked.
red gold to be, and treasures. "Come ye two alone, to-morrow come;
that gold shall be given to you.
any one, that ye have been with me." Early called one the other,
brother, brother: "Let us go see the rings."
grudge, when therein they looked. Of those children he the heads cut
off, and under the prison's mixen laid their bodies.
gave; and of their eyes precious stones he formed, which to Nidud's
wily wife he sent.
Bodvild sent. Then did Bodvild praise the ring: to Volund brought it,
when she had broken it: "I dare to no tell it, save alone to thee."
_Volund_.
shall fairer seem, and to thy mother much more beautiful, and to
thyself, in the same degree."
on her seat she fell asleep. "Now have I my wrongs avenged, all save
one in the wood perpetrated."[47]
which Nidud's men have deprived me." Laughing Volund rose in air:
Bodvild weeping from the isle departed. She mourned her lover's
absence, and for her father's wrath.
hall; but he on the enclosure sat down to rest. "Art thou awake
Niarars' lord!"
children's death: my head is chilled, cold are to me thy counsels.
Now with Volund I desire to speak."
become?"
shield, by shoulder of steed, by edge of sword, that thou wilt not
slay the wife of Volund, nor of my bride cause the death; although a
wife I have whom ye know, or offspring within thy court.
bellows find with blood besprinkled. The heads I severed of thy boys,
and under the prison's mixen laid their bodies.
gave; and of their eyes precious stones I formed, which to Nidud's
wily wife I sent.
sent. Now Bodvild goes big with child, the only daughter of you both."
which I would more severely punish thee. There is no man so tall that
he from thy horse can take thee, or so skilful that he can shoot thee
down, thence where thou floatest up in the sky."
fair-browed daughter, in bright attire come, with her sire to speak.
Volund in the isle together sat?"
I in the isle together sat, in an unlucky hour: would it had never
been! I could not against him strive, I might not against him
prevail."
Volund, who, as we learn from the prose introduction, was a son of a
king of the Finns, may perhaps be accounted for by the circumstance
that the poem itself hardly belongs to the Odinic Mythology, and was
probably composed when that system was in its decline and giving place
to the heroic or romantic.]
conjectural emendation of the text. The wrong alluded to may be the
hamstringing.]
There was a king named Hiorvard, who had four wives, one of whom was
named Alfhild, their son was named Hedin; the second was named Særeid,
their son was Humlung; the third was named Sinriod, their son was
Hymling. King Hiorvard made a vow that he would have to wife the most
beautiful woman he knew of, and was told that King Svafnir had a
daughter of incomparable beauty, named Sigrlinn. He had a jarl named
Idmund, whose son Atli was sent to demand the hand of Sigrlinn for the
king. He stayed throughout the winter with King Svafnir. There was a
jarl there named Franmar, who was the foster-father of Sigrlinn, and
had a daughter named Alof. This jarl advised that the maiden should be
refused, and Atli returned home. One day when the jarl's son Atli was
standing in a grove, there was a bird sitting in the boughs above him,
which had heard that his men called the wives which King Hiorvard had
the most beautiful. The bird talked, and Atli listened to what it
said. The bird said:
in her pleasant home? though fair the wives of Hiorvard seem to men in
Glasis-lund.
_Atli._
_Bird._
I will if the prince will offer to me, and I may choose what I will
from the king's court.
_Atli._
prince, nor the wives which the king has. Let us together bargain;
that is the part of friends.
_Bird._
chief's land, if Sigrlinn sleep in his arms, and unconstrained with
that prince shall live.
This took place before Atli's journey; but after his return, when the
king asked his tidings, he said:
us in the vast fell; we had afterwards a swampy lake to ford; then was
denied us Svafnir's daughter with rings adorned, whom we would obtain.
The king commanded them to go a second time, and also went himself.
But when they had ascended a fell, and saw in Svavaland the country on
fire, and a great reek from the horses of cavalry, the king rode down
the fell into the country, and took up his night-quarters by a river.
Atli kept watch, and crossed the river, and came to a house, on which
sat a great bird to guard it, but was asleep. Atli shot the bird dead
with an arrow. In the house he found the king's daughter Sigrlinn, and
Alof daughter of Franmar, and brought them both away with him. The
jarl Franmar had taken the form of an eagle, and protected them from a
hostile army by sorcery. There was a king named Hrodmar, a wooer of
Sigrlinn: he had slain the king of Svavaland, and ravaged and burnt
the country. Hiorvard obtained Sigrlinn, and Atli Alof. Hiorvard and
Sigrlinn had a son tall and comely: he was taciturn and had no fixed
name. As he was sitting on a mound he saw nine Valkyriur, one of whom
was of most noble aspect. She said:
Rodulsvellir,--so at morn the eagle sang--if thou art ever silent;
although thou, prince! a fierce mood mayest show.
_Helgi_.
bright! since that thou art pleased to give me? Think well over what
thou art saying. I will not accept it, unless I have thee also.
_Valkyria_.
ten: one of them is of all the best, of shields the bale, with gold
adorned.
for his use who owns it: along the edge a blood-stained serpent lies,
and on the guard the serpent casts its tail.
There was a king named Eylimi; Svava was his daughter; she was a
Valkyria and rode through air and water. It was she who gave Helgi
that name, and afterwards often protected him in battle. Helgi said:
people! renowned though thou mayest be. Thou hast let fire devour the
homes of princes, though harm to thee they none have done.
possessed. That chief recks little of his life; he thinks only to
obtain the heritage of the dead.
Hiorvard answers, that he will supply Helgi with an army, if he will
avenge his mother's father. Helgi thereupon seeks the sword that Svava
had indicated to him. Afterwards he and Atli went and slew Hrodmar,
and performed many deeds of valour. He killed the Jotun Hati, as he
sat on a crag. Helgi and Atli lay with their ships in Hatafiord. Atli
kept watch in the first part of the night. Hrimgerd, Hati's daughter,
said:
bedecked; boldly ye bear yourselves, few things ye fear, I ween: tell
me how your king is named.
_Atli_.
iron forts are around the prince's fleet; giantesses may not assail
us.
_Hrimgerd_.
thee? Thy king confides in thee, since in the ship's fair prow he
grants thee place.
_Atli_.
giantesses I am most hostile. The humid prow I have oft occupied, and
the night-riders slain.
father. Nine rasts shouldst thou be underground, and a forest grow on
thy breast.
_Hrimgerd_.
mightiest Jotun. He many women had from their dwellings taken, until
him Helgi slew.
_Atli_.
them in the fiord's mouth. The chieftain's warriors thou wouldst to
Ran consign, had a bar not crossed thee.
_Hrimgerd_.
thou lettest over thy eyelids fall. My mother lay before the prince's
ships; I Hlodvard's sons drowned in the ocean.
Hrimgerd cocks her tail. Thy heart, methinks, Atli! is in thy hinder
part, although thy voice is clear.
_Atli_.
and I can step from the port to land. Thou shalt be soundly cudgeled,
if I heartily begin, and let thy tail fall, Hrimgerd!
_Hrimgerd_.
let us meet in Varinsvik. A rib-roasting thou shalt get, brave boy! if
in my claws thou comest.
_Atli_.
watch. It would not surprise me, if from beneath our ship some hag
arose.
_Hrimgerd_.
death. If one night she may sleep with the prince, she for the slain
will be indemnified.
_Helgi_.
loathsome. In Tholley dwells that Thurs, that dog-wise Jotun, of all
rock-dwellers the worst: he is a fitting man for thee.
_Hrimgerd_.
men, the gold-bright maiden. She methought had strength, she stept
from port to land, and so secured your fleet. She was alone the cause
that I could not the king's men slay.
_Helgi_.
king: was it one being only, that saved the prince's ships, or went
many together?
_Hrimgerd_.
with helmed head. Their horses shook themselves, and from their manes
there sprang dew into the deep dales, hail on the lofty trees, whence
comes fruitfulness to man. To me all that I saw was hateful.
_Atli_.
with death-bearing words. By land and water the king's fleet is safe,
and the chief's men also.
of life. A ludicrous haven-mark 'twill, indeed, be, where thou a
stone-image standest.
King Helgi was a renowned warrior. He came to King Eylimi and demanded
his daughter Svava. Helgi and Svava were united, and loved each other
ardently. Svava remained at home with her father, but Helgi was
engaged in warfare. Svava was a Valkyria as before. Hedin was at home
with his father, King Hiorvard in Norway. Returning home alone from
the forest on a Yule-eve, Hedin met a troll-wife riding on a wolf,
with serpents for reins, who offered to attend him, but he declined
her offer; whereupon she said: "Thou shalt pay for this at the
Bragi-cup." In the evening solemn vows were made, and the son-hog was
led forth, on which the guests laid their hands, and then made solemn
vows at the Bragi-cup.[48] Hedin bound himself by a vow to possess
Svava, the beloved of his brother Helgi; but repented it so bitterly
that he left home and wandered through wild paths to the southern
lands, and there found his brother Helgi. Helgi said:
Norway? Why art thou, prince! from the land driven, and alone art come
to find us?
_Hedin_.
daughter, thy bride, at the Bragi-cup.
_Helgi_.
us both. Me a chieftain has to the strand summoned; within three
nights I must be there. 'Tis to me doubtful whether I return; then may
well such befall, if it so must be.
_Hedin_.
gifts: It would beseem thee better thy sword to redden, than to grant
peace to thy foes.
Helgi so spoke, for he had a foreboding that his death was at hand,
and that his fylgiur (attendant spirit) had accosted Hedin, when he
saw the woman riding on a wolf. There was a king named Alf, a son of
Hrodmar, who had appointed a place of combat with Helgi in Sigar's
plain within three days. Then said Helgi:
attend. She well knew, that the son of Sigrlinn would be slain, on
Sigar's plain.
There was a great conflict, in which Helgi got his death-wound.
her quickly be in readiness, if she would find the king alive.
_Sigar_.
Thee, said the king, he fain would see, ere the noble-born breathes
forth his last.
_Svava_.
afflictions stricken. Has the sea him deluded, or the sword wounded?
On that man I will harm inflict.
_Sigar_.
was of all the best. Alf has complete victory, though this time it
should not have been!
_Helgi_.
world, methinks, is our last meeting. They say the chieftain's wounds
are bleeding. The sword came too near my heart.
obey, that for Hedin thou a couch prepare, and the young prince in thy
arms clasp.
_Svava_.
selected, that I would not gladly, after my king's departure, an
unknown prince clasp in my arms.
_Hedin_.
Rodulsfioll, before I have avenged Hiorvard's son, who was of kings
under the sun the best.
Helgi and Svava were, it is said, born again.
the custom at the funeral feast of kings and jarls, that the heir
should sit on a lower seat, until the Bragafull was brought in, that
he should then rise to receive it, make a vow, and drink the contents
of the cup (full). He was then led to his father's high seat. At an
offering guild, the chief signed with the figure of Thor's hammer both
the cup and the meat. First was drunk Odin's cup, for victory and
power to the king; then Niord's cup, and Frey's, for a good year and
peace; after which it was the custom with many to drink a Bragafull.
The peculiarity of this cup was, that it was a cup of vows, that on
drinking it a vow was made to perform some great and arduous deed,
that might be made a subject for the song of the skalld.]
fell from the heavenly hills; then to Helgi, the great of soul,
Borghild gave birth in Bralund.
prince's life determine. They him decreed a prince most famed to be,
and of leaders accounted best.
burghs should overthrow[49] in Bralund. They stretched out the golden
cord, and beneath the middle of the moon's mansion fixed it.
between; towards the north Neri's sister cast a chain, which she bade
last for ever.
had the child brought forth. Sitting on a lofty tree, on prey intent,
a raven to a raven said: "I know something.
come. His eyes are piercing as a warrior's; the wolf's friend is he:
we shall rejoice!"
that happy times were come; went the king himself from the din of war,
noble garlic to bring to the young prince;
and Sigarsvellir, Hringstad, Hatun, and Himinvangar, a sword ornate,
to Sinfiotli's brother.
joyous splendour. He paid and gave gold for deserts; nor spared the
chief the blood-stained sword.
was fifteen winters old, he caused the fierce Hunding to fall, who
long had ruled over lands and people.
treasure and rings; because they had on the prince to avenge their
great loss of wealth, and their father's death.
indemnity would give. They might expect, he said, a terrific storm of
grey arrows, and Odin's ire.
had appointed at Logafioll. Broken was Frodi's peace between the foes:
Vidrir's hounds went about the isle slaughter-greedy.
Eyiolf, Hiorvard and Havard, sons of Hunding: he had destroyed all
Geirmimir's race.
issued; then appeared, in the field of air, a helmed band of
Valkyriur: their corslets were with blood besprinkled, and from their
spears shone beams of light.
the southern Disir, whether they would, with the warriors, that night
go home?--then was a clash of arms!
shields, and to the leader said: "We have, I ween, other objects than
with princely warriors to drink beer.
Granmar; but I have, Helgi! declared Hodbrodd, the proud prince, like
to a cat's son.
hostile meeting; or the maiden take from the prince."
_Helgi_.
foes, unless I am dead.
water, succours to demand, and abundance of ocean's gleam to men to
offer, and to their sons.
hold them ready." There the king abode, until thither came warriors in
hundreds from Hedinsey.
out, with gold adorned. Helgi then of Hiorleif asked: "Hast thou
mustered the valiant people?"
counted from Tronuey the long-beaked ships, under the seafarers, which
sail without in the Oresund,--
half of the king's host--We are to war inured."
princes' people might awake, and the noble chiefs the dawn might see;
and the warriors hauled the sails up to the mast in Varinsfiord.
shield resounded: the vikings rowed; roaring went, under the
chieftains the royal fleet far from the land.
and the long keels, as when rock and surge on each other break.
shelter to the crews; when Oegir's terrific daughter the chieftains'
vessels would o'erwhelm,
from the hand of Ran powerfully was wrested the royal ship at
Gnipalund.
port have floated, but the crews, from Svarinshaug, in hostile mood,
espied the host.
commands the fleet, and that formidable force brings to our land?"
golden rim;--He at the strait kept watch, and able was to answer, and
with nobles words exchange--
their food, that the Ylfings from the east are come, ready to fight at
Gnipalund.
make flee, who has oft the eagles sated, while thou wast at the mills,
kissing the thrall-wenches.
_Gudmund_.
thou falsehoods utterest. Thou hast been eating wolves' dainties, and
of thy brother wast the slayer; wounds hast thou often sucked with
cold mouth; every where loathed, thou hast crawled in caverns.
_Sinfiotli_.
of lies. Thou saidst thou no man wouldst ever marry, no corsleted
warrior, save Sinfiotli.
monstrous, in Alfather's hall. All the Einheriar fought with each
other, deceitful woman! for thy sake. Nine wolves we begat in Sagunes;
I alone was father of them all.
_Gudmund_.
I remember; since by Gnipalund, the Thurs-maidens thee emasculated
upon Thorsnes.
accustomed to the wolf's howl out in the forests: calamity of every
kind came over thee, when thou didst lacerate thy brother's breast.
Notorious thou mad'st thyself by thy atrocious works.
_Sinfiotli_.
for the course. Many a time have I ridden thee tired, hungry and
saddled, through the fells, thou hag!
_Gudmund_.
thou didst milk. Another time thou wast a giantess's daughter, a
tattered wretch. Wilt thou a longer chat?
_Sinfiotli_.
than thy dogs lead to their meat, or thy hogs feed. May the fiend deal
with thee!
_Helgi_.
to engage, and the eagles gladden, than with useless words to contend,
however princes[51] may foster hate.
princes should speak the truth: they have shown, at Moinsheimar, that
they have courage to draw the sword."--
Solheimar, over dewy dales, dark mountain-sides; trembled the sea of
mist, where the men went.
the hostile advent. Without stood Hodbrodd with helmet decked: he the
speed noticed of his kinsmen. "Why have ye Hniflungs such wrathful
countenances?"
long yards, shields many, and smooth-shaven oars, a king's noble host,
joyous Ylfings.
Gnipalund, seven thousand blue-black ocean-beasts with gold adorned;
there is by far their greatest multitude. Now will Helgi not delay the
conflict."
_Hodbrodd_.
to Sparinsheid; Melnir and Mylnir to Myrkvid; let no man stay behind
of those who swords can brandish.
the old; they will gladly engage in conflict. We will let the Volsungs
find resistance."
Frekastein: ever was Helgi Hundingsbani foremost in the host, where
men together fought: ardent for battle, disdaining flight; the
chieftain had a valiant heart.
arms increased--for the king's protection. Then said Sigrun--well
skilled to fly to the host of heroes from Hugin's grove--[53]
Yngvi's race! and life enjoy; thou hast laid low the slow of flight,
the chief who caused the dread warrior's death. And thee, O king! well
beseem both red-gold rings and a powerful maid: unscathed shalt thou,
prince! both enjoy, Hogni's daughter, and Hringstadir, victory and
lands: then is conflict ended."
destiny.]
and Ran; they were the waves.]
strewed with corpses, the raven's food.]
King Sigmund, son of Volsung, had to wife Borghild of Bralund. They
named their son Helgi, after Helgi Hiorvard's son. Helgi was fostered
by Hagal. There was a powerful king named Hunding, after whom the land
was called Hundland. He was a great warrior, and had many sons, who
were engaged in warfare. There was enmity, both open and concealed,
between King Hunding and King Sigmund, and they slew each other's
kinsmen. King Sigmund and his kindred were called Volsungs, and
Ylfings. Helgi went forth and secretly explored the court of King
Hunding. Heming, Hunding's son, was at home. On departing Helgi met a
herdsman, and said:
warrior was, whom the men laid low, when the grey wolf ye had within,
and King Hunding thought it was Hamal."
Hamal was the son of Hagal. King Hunding sent men to Hagal in search
of Helgi, and Helgi had no other way to save himself than by taking
the clothes of a female slave and going to grind. They sought but did
not find him. Then said Blind the Baleful:
is she who at the mill stands. The millstones are split, the receiver
flies asunder. Now a hard fate has befallen the warrior, when a prince
must barley grind: much more fitting to that hand is the falchion's
hilt than a mill-handle.
Hagal answered and said:--
handle turns. She hovered higher than the clouds, and, like the
vikings, dared to fight, until Helgi made her captive. She is a sister
of Sigar and Hogni; therefore has fierce eyes the Ylfing maid.
Helgi escaped and went on board a ship of war. He slew King Hunding,
and was afterwards named Helgi Hundingsbani. He lay with his force in
Brunavagar, and carried on "strand-hogg"[54] and ate raw flesh. There
was a king named Hogni, whose daughter was Sigrun: she was a Valkyria,
and rode through the air and over the sea. She was Svava regenerated.
Sigrun rode to Helgi, and said:--
warriors a home possess? what await ye in Brunavagar? whither desire
ye to explore a way?
_Helgi_.
Hlesey; a fair wind we await in Brunavagar; eastward we desire to
explore a way.
_Sigrun_.
conflict's sisters?[55] Why is thy corslet sprinkled with blood? Why
beneath the helm eat ye raw flesh?
_Helgi_.
know--west of the ocean, that I took bears in Bragalund, and the
eagles' race with our weapons sated. Now, maiden! I have said what the
reasons were, why at sea we little cooked meat ate.
_Sigrun_.
doomed to fall. In conflict ye have engaged, when your kindred ye
avenged, and stained with blood the falchion's edge.
_Helgi_.
their kin avenged? Many a warrior's bold sons there are, and hostile
to our kindred.
_Sigrun_.
end: yet crafty I account Sigmund's son, when in val-runes[56] the
slaughter he announces.
station on the bloody prow, and the cold sea waves were playing. Now,
prince! thou wilt from me conceal it, but Hogni's daughter recognizes
thee.
Granmar was the name of a powerful prince who dwelt at Svarinshaug. He
had many sons: one was called Hodbrodd, the second Gudmund, the third
Starkadr. Hodbrodd was at the assembly of kings, and there betrothed
himself to Sigrun, the daughter of Hogni. But when she was informed of
it, she rode with the Valkyriur through the air and over the sea in
quest of Helgi. Helgi was at that time at Logafioll, warring against
the sons of Hunding, where he slew Alf and Eyiolf, Hiorvard and
Hervard. Being over-fatigued with the conflict, he was sitting under
the Arastein, where Sigrun found him, and running to him, threw her
arms around his neck, and, kissing him, told him her errand so as it
related in the first Volsungakvida.
grasped, kissed and addressed the helm-decked king.
that she had loved, with her whole heart, Sigmund's son, before she
had seen him.
prince would have: yet, chieftain! I foresee my kindred's wrath: I
have my father's promise broken."
that Helgi's affection she must possess.
_Helgi_.
kin. Thou shalt, young maiden! live with me: of a good race thou art,
as I perceive.
Helgi then collected a large fleet and proceeded to Frekastein, and at
sea experienced a perilous storm. Lightnings came over them, and the
flashes entered the ships. They saw that nine Valkyriur were riding in
the air, and recognized Sigrun among them. The storm then abated and
they reached land in safety. The sons of Granmar were sitting on a
hill as the ships were sailing towards the land. Gudmund leapt on a
horse, and rode to explore on the hill by the haven. The Volsungs then
lowered their sails, and Gudmund spoke as is before written in the
Helgakvida:--
"Who is the leader that commands the fleet, and an appalling host
leads to our land?"
This said Gudmund, Granmar's son:
banner wave o'er his prow? No peace seems to me in that ship's front;
it casts a warlike glow around the vikings.
Sinfiotli, Sigmund's son, answered:
the fleet's midst: he the possession holds of thy race; he the fishes'
heritage has to him subjected.
_Gudmund_.
decide our quarrels! Hodbrodd! 'tis time vengeance to take, if an
inferior lot we long have borne.
_Sinfiotli_.
shalt climb, have in thy hand a hazel staff, that will better please
thee than judgments of the sword.
Gudmund rode home with intelligence of the hostile armament; whereupon
the sons of Granmar collected a host, and many kings came thither.
Among them were Hogni, the father of Sigrun, with his sons, Bragi and
Dag. There was a great battle, and all the sons of Hogni, and all
their chiefs were slain, except Dag, who obtained peace, and swore
oaths to the Volsungs. Sigrun, going among the slain, found Hodbrodd
at the point of death. She said:
thy life is departed. Oft the axe's blade the head approaches of
Granmar's sons.
She then met Helgi, and was overjoyed. He said:
say, in somewhat are the Norns to blame. This morn have fallen at
Frekastein Bragi and Hogni: I was their slayer.
Hrollaug. That prince I saw of all most fierce, whose trunk yet fought
when the head was far.
turned. Thou hast not fought the battle, yet 'twas decreed, that thou,
potent maiden! shouldst cause the strife.
Sigrun then wept. Helgi said:
cannot conquer fate: gladly would I have them living who are departed,
if I might clasp thee to my breast.
Helgi obtained Sigrun, and they had sons. Helgi lived not to be old.
Dag, the son of Hogni, sacrificed to Odin, for vengeance for his
father. Odin lent Dag his spear. Dag met with his relation Helgi in a
place called Fioturlund, and pierced him through with his spear. Helgi
fell there, but Dag rode to the mountains and told Sigrun what had
taken place.
have my sister caused to weep. This morning fell, in Fioturlund, the
prince who was on earth the best, and on the necks of warriors stood.
_Sigrun_.
at the limpid Leiptr's water, and at the cold dank wave-washed rock.
although the wished-for wind behind thee blow. May the horse not run,
which under thee should run, although from enemies thou hast to flee!
thy own head. Then would Helgi's death be on thee avenged, if a wolf
thou wert, out in the woods, of all good bereft, and every joy, have
no sustenance, unless on corpses thou shouldst spring.
_Dag_.
thou callest down such miseries. Odin alone is cause of all the evil;
for between relatives he brought the runes of strife.
Vigdalir: have half the land, thy grief to compensate, woman
ring-adorned! thou and thy sons.
_Sigrun_.
night, as to feel joy in life, if o'er the people plays not the
prince's beam of light; if his war-steed runs not under the chieftain
hither, to the gold bit accustomed; if in the king I cannot rejoice.
before the wolf the goats run frantic from the fell, of terror full.
among thorns, or as the fawn, moistened with dew, that more proudly
stalks than all the other beasts, and its horns glisten against the
sky.
A mound was raised for Helgi; but when he came to Valhall, Odin
offered him the rule over all jointly with himself. Helgi said:
kindle; shalt bind the dogs, to the horses look, to the swine give
wash, ere to sleep thou goest.
A female slave passing at evening by Helgi's mound, saw him riding
towards it with many men:
dissolution, that ye, dead men, ride, and your horses with spurs urge
on, or to warriors is a home journey granted?
_Helgi_.
end, although thou seest us, although our horses we with spurs urge
on, nor to warriors is a home-journey granted.
The slave went home and said to Sigrun:
desirest to meet. The mound is opened, Helgi is come, his wounds still
bleed; the prince prayed thee that thou wouldst still the trickling
blood.
Sigrun entered the mound to Helgi and said:
Odin, when they of slaughter know; of warm prey, or, dewy-feathered,
see the peep of day.
aside. Thy hair is, Helgi! tumid with sweat of death; my prince is all
bathed in slaughter-dew; cold, clammy are the hands of Hogni's son.
How shall I, prince! for this make thee amends?
_Helgi_.
with sorrow's dew suffused. Thou weepest, gold-adorned! cruel tears,
sun-bright daughter of the south! ere to sleep thou goest; each one
falls bloody on the prince's breast, wet, cold, and piercing, with
sorrow big.
life and lands. No one shall a song of mourning sing, though on my
breast he wounds behold. Now are women in the mound enclosed,
daughters of kings, with us the dead.
Sigrun prepares a bed in the mound.
Ylfings' son. On thy breast I will, chieftain! repose, as in my hero's
lifetime I was wont.
_Helgi_.
since in a corpse's arms thou sleepest, Hogni's fair daughter! in a
mound, and thou art living, daughter of kings!
horse tread the aerial path. I towards the west must go over
Vindhialm's bridge, ere Salgofnir awakens heroes.
Helgi and his attendants rode their way, but Sigrun and hers proceeded
to their habitation. The following evening Sigrun ordered her
serving-maid to hold watch at the mound; but at nightfall, when Sigrun
came thither, she said:
Odin's halls. I think the hope lessens of the king's coming, since on
the ash's boughs the eagles sit, and all the folk to the dreams' tryst
are hastening.
_Serving-maid_.
draugs:[58] more powerful are, in the night-season, all dead warriors,
than in the light of day.
Sigrun's life was shortened by grief and mourning. It was a belief in
ancient times that men were regenerated, but that is now regarded as
an old crone's fancy. Helgi and Sigrun are said to have been
regenerated. He was then called Helgi Haddingiaskadi, and she Kara
Halfdan's daughter, as it is said in the songs of Kara; and she also
was a Valkyria.
sea-shore.]
doubt, the origin of some very beautiful ballads in the later
literature of Scandinavia and Germany referring to this superstition:
"When thou, my dear, art cheerful,
And easy in thy mind,
The coffin where I slumber
Is all with roses lined.
But oft as thou'rt in sorrow,
And bow'd with grief so sore,
Is all the while my coffin
Brim full of blood and gore."
]
Sigmund Volsung's son was a king in Frankland. Sinfiotli was the
eldest of his sons, the second was Helgi, the third Hamund. Borghild,
Sigmund's wife, had a brother named Gunnar; but Sinfiotli her stepson
and Gunnar both courted one woman, on which account Sinfiotli slew
Gunnar. When he came home, Borghild bade him go away, but Sigmund
offered the blood-fine, which it was incumbent on her to accept. At
the funeral feast Borghild presented the beer: she took a large horn
full of poison, and offered it to Sinfiotli; who, when he looked into
the horn, and saw that there was poison in it, said to Sigmund: "the
drink ferments!" Sigmund took the horn and drank up the contents. It
is said that Sigmund was so strong that no poison could hurt him,
either outwardly or inwardly; but that all his sons could endure
poison outwardly. Borghild bore another horn to Sinfiotli, and prayed
him to drink, when all took place as before. Yet a third time she
offered him the horn, using reproachful words on his refusing to
drink. He said as before to Sigmund, but the latter answered: "Let it
pass through thy lips, my son." Sinfiotli drank and instantly died.
Sigmund bore him a long way in his arms, and came to a long and narrow
firth, where there was a little vessel and one man in it. He offered
Sigmund to convey him over the firth; but when Sigmund had borne the
corpse into the vessel, the boat was full-laden. The man then said
that Sigmund should go before through the firth. He then pushed off
his boat and instantly departed.
King Sigmund sojourned long in Denmark, in Borghild's kingdom, after
having espoused her. He then went south to Frankland, to the kingdom
he there possessed. There he married Hiordis, the daughter of Eylimi.
Sigurd was their son. King Sigmund fell in a battle with the sons of
Hunding. Hiordis was afterwards married to Alf, son of King Hialprek,
with whom Sigurd grew up in childhood. Sigmund and his sons exceeded
all other men in strength, and stature, and courage, and all
accomplishments, though Sigurd was foremost of all; and in old
traditions he is mentioned as excelling all men, and as the most
renowned of warlike kings.
Gripir was the name of the son of Eylimi, the brother of Hiordis. He
ruled over lands, and was of all men wisest and prescient of the
future. Sigurd rode alone, and came to Gripir's dwelling. Sigurd was
of a distinguished figure. He found a man to address outside the hall,
whose name was Geitir. Sigurd applied to him, and asked:
name him?
_Geitir_.
Gripir is named the chief of men, he who rules a firm realm and
people.
_Sigurd_.
and converse? With him needs speech an unknown man: I desire speedily
Gripir to see.
_Geitir_.
speech of Gripir.
_Sigurd_.
Sigurd I am named, born of Sigmund, and Hiordis is the chieftain's
mother.
stranger, come; of aspect he is most distinguished. He desires, king!
with thee to speak."
kindly greets: "Welcome, Sigurd! better had it been earlier: but do
thou, Geitir! take charge of Grani."
together met. "Tell me, if thou knowest, my mother's brother! how will
Sigurd's life fall out?"
_Gripir_.
every king; liberal of gold, but of flight sparing, of aspect comely,
and wise of words.
_Sigurd_.
if thou thinkst to see it: what will first happen for my advancement,
when from thy dwelling I shall have departed?
_Gripir_.
Eylimi wilt retaliate; thou wilt the cruel sons of Hunding boldly lay
low; thou wilt have victory.
_Sigurd_.
friendly converse; seest thou of Sigurd those bold achievements, that
will highest soar under heaven's regions?"
_Gripir_.
on Gnitaheid; thou shalt of both the slayer be, Regin and Fafnir.
Gripir tells truly.
_Sigurd_.
for certain sayest. Apply thy mind, and at length say what will yet my
life befall.
_Gripir_.
riches, with gold wilt load Grani's back. Thou wilt to Giuki ride, the
war-famed prince.
_Sigurd_.
more relate. I shall be Giuki's guest, and I shall thence depart: what
will next my life befall?
_Gripir_.
cased, after Helgi's death. Thou wilt strike with a keen sword, wilt
the corslet sever with Fafnir's bane.
_Sigurd_.
awakened from her sleep, on what will she chiefly with Sigurd converse
hold, which to the prince's benefit may tend?
_Gripir_.
men ought to know; and in every man's tongue to speak, and medicines
for healing. May good await thee, king!
_Sigurd_.
thence away to ride. Apply thy mind, and at length say what more will
my life befall.
_Gripir_.
that great king. Vanished is, Sigurd! that which I foresaw; no further
mayest thou Gripir question.
_Sigurd_.
king! much further; thou knowest of too great calamity to Sigurd;
therefore thou, Gripir! wilt not utter it.
_Gripir_.
contemplate. I am not truly accounted sage, nor of the future
prescient: that which I knew is gone.
_Sigurd_.
than thou, Gripir! Thou mayest not conceal it, unhappy though it be,
or if ill betide my life.
_Gripir_.
prince! in thy mind be borne; for while mankind exists, thy name,
director of the spear-storm! will be supreme.
_Sigurd_.
part in such uncertainty. Show me the way--all is decreed
before--great chieftain! if thou wilt, my mother's brother!
_Gripir_.
compels: thou wilt surely find that I lie not. A certain day is for
thy death decreed.
_Sigurd_.
good counsel have. Now I fain would know, though grateful it may not
be, what prospect Sigurd has lying before him.
_Gripir_.
Brynhild named, daughter of Budli; but the dear king Heimir nurtures
the hard-souled damsel.
_Sigurd_.
nurtured with Heimir? That thou, Gripir! must fully declare; for thou
foreseest my whole destiny.
_Gripir_.
foster-child of Heimir. Thou wilt not sleep, nor of affairs
discourse, nor men regard; only this maiden thou wilt see.
_Sigurd_.
it seem good to thee. Shall I obtain the damsel? with dowry purchase
the lovely royal daughter?
_Gripir_.
will keep. Hast thou been Giuki's guest one night, thou wilt have
forgotten the fair ward of Heimir.
_Sigurd_.
fickleness in the king's mind, that with that maiden I shall my
engagement break, whom with my whole heart I thought to love?
_Gripir_.
the penalty of Grimhild's craft; the bright-haired maiden, her
daughter, she to thee will offer. This snare for the king she lays.
_Sigurd_.
in wedlock? Well wived then the king would be, if the pangs of perjury
caused me no pain.
_Gripir_.
Brynhild to demand for the hand of Gunnar, king of Goths: the journey
thou wilt forthwith promise to the king's mother.
_Sigurd_.
wholly perished, if I shall demand for another's hand, a noble maiden
whom I well love.
_Gripir_.
the third; and ye will forms exchange, when on the way ye are, Gunnar
and thou: Gripir lies not.
_Sigurd_.
when on the way we are? Another fraud will surely follow this,
altogether horrible. But say on, Gripir!
_Gripir_.
eloquence, and great sagacity: there thou wilt betroth the high-minded
ward of Heimir: no one can that prevent.
_Sigurd_.
traitor called, if such take place. I would not deception practise on
a royal maid the most excellent I know.
_Gripir_.
thy mother were; therefore exalted, lord of men! while the world
endures thy name will be.
Gunnar, in Giuki's halls; then will ye forms exchange, when ye home
return; yet to himself will have each his own senses.
_Sigurd._
that, Gripir! although three nights by me the chieftain's bride glad
of heart has slept? The like has no example.
that, Gripir! Will the alliance for Gunnar's solace henceforth prove,
or even for mine?
_Gripir._
Gudrun enjoy a happy union. Brynhild nathless will herself think an
ill-married woman. She will wiles devise to avenge herself.
_Sigurd._
have practised on her? From me the maiden has oaths sworn, but never
kept, and but little joy.
_Gripir._
oaths observe, when the noble king, Giuki's heir, with his whole soul,
in thee confided.
_Sigurd._
as true, or that the noble woman falsely accuses me, and herself also.
Tell me that, Gripir!
_Gripir_.
powerful dame will not most wisely act. To the noble woman do thou no
further harm, though thou the royal bride with guiles hast
circumvented.
_Sigurd_.
then proceed? Will Giuki's sons on their relative redden their swords?
Tell me further, Gripir!
_Gripir_.
thy death resolve. In nothing then will that wise woman take delight.
Such is Grimhild's work.
is allotted to the hero's life: a more renowned man on earth shall
never be, under the sun's abode, than thou wilt be accounted.
_Sigurd_.
thou, Gripir! done as I prayed thee: thou wouldst have fain a happier
end foretold me of my life's days, hadst thou been able.
Sigurd went to Hialprek's stud and chose himself a horse, which was
afterwards named Grani. Regin, Hreidmar's son, was then come to
Hialprek; he was the most skilful of men, and a dwarf in stature; he
was wise, cruel, and versed in magic. Regin undertook the rearing and
instruction of Sigurd, and bore him great affection. He informed
Sigurd of his parentage, and how it befell that Odin, and Hoenir, and
Loki came to Andvarafors (the waterfall of Andvari). In the fall there
was an abundance of fish. There was a dwarf named Andvari, who had
long lived in the fall in the likeness of a pike, and in which he
supplied himself with food. "Our brother," continued Regin, "was named
Otr, who often went into the fall in the likeness of an otter. He had
caught a salmon, and was sitting on the bank of the river with his
eyes shut eating it, when Loki killed him with a stone. The Æsir
thought themselves very lucky, and stripped off the otter's skin. That
same evening they sought entertainment with Hreidmar, and showed their
prize. Thereupon we laid hands on them, and imposed on them, as the
redemption of their lives, that they should fill the otter's skin with
gold, and cover it over with red gold. They thereupon sent Loki to
procure gold. He went to Ran, and obtained her net, and thence
proceeded to Andvarafors, and cast the net before a pike, which leapt
into the net. Whereupon Loki said:
itself protect? Redeem thy life from Hel, and find me the water's
flame.[59] _The Pike_.
I passed. A luckless Norn in times of old decreed, that in the water I
should wade.
_Loki_.
what retribution get the sons of mortals, if with foul words they
assail each other.
_Andvari_.
for the false words they have against others uttered, the punishments
too long endure.
Loki viewed all the gold that Andvari owned; but when he had produced
the gold, he retained a single ring, which Loki also took from him.
The dwarf went into his stone and said:
cause of death, and to eight princes, of dissension. From my wealth no
one shall good derive.
The Æsir produced the gold to Hreidmar, and with it crammed the
otter's skin full, and set it up on the feet. They then had to heap up
the gold and cover it; but when that was done, Hreidmar, stepping
forward, observed a whisker, and required it to be covered; whereupon
Odin drew forth the ring "Andvaranaut," and covered the hair. Loki
said:
life. For thy son no blessing is decreed; of both it shall prove the
bane.
_Hreidmar_.
kind heart thou hast not given. Of your lives ye should have been
deprived, had I foreknown that peril.
a woman. Princes yet unborn I think them to be, for whose hate that
gold is destined.
threats I entertain no fear; so take yourselves hence home.
Fafnir and Regin demanded of Hreidmar their share of the blood-fine
for their slain brother Otr, which he refused, and Fafnir stabbed his
father with a sword while sleeping. Hreidmar called out to his
daughters:
need compels.[60] _Lyngheid_.
Few sisters will, although they lose a father, avenge a brother's
crime.
_Hreidmar_.
thou have not a son. Get for the maid a spouse, in thy great need;
then will her son thy wrong avenge.
Hreidmar then died, and Fafnir took all the gold. Regin then requested
to have his share of the patrimony, but met with a refusal from
Fafnir. Regin thereupon sought counsel of his sister Lyngheid, how he
might obtain his patrimony. She said:
better spirit. It is not seemly, that with the sword thou shouldst
demand thy property of Fafnir.
The foregoing is what Regin related to Sigurd. One day, when he came
to Regin's dwelling, he was kindly received, and Regin said:
energy: courage he has greater than I aged man: now of a conflict have
I hope from the fierce wolf.[61]
to us come; he will be a king under the sun most powerful; over all
lands will his destinies resound.
Sigurd was thence forward constantly with Regin, who related to him
how Fafnir lay on Gnitaheid in the likeness of a serpent. He had an
"Oegis-helm,"[62] at which all living beings were terror-stricken.
Regin forged a sword for Sigurd, that was named Gram, and was so sharp
that immersing it in the Rhine, he let a piece of wool down the
stream, when it clove the fleece asunder as water. With that sword
Sigurd clove in two Regin's anvil. After that Regin instigated Sigurd
to slay Fafnir. He said:
deprived, if the prince is more desirous to seek red rings, than to
avenge his father.
King Hialprek collected a fleet to enable Sigurd to avenge his father.
They encountered a great storm, and were driven past a certain
promontory. A man was standing on the cliff who said:
roaring main: the sail-steeds are with sweat bedewed, the
wave-coursers will not the wind withstand.
_Regin_.
death itself: higher than our prows the steep waves dash, the rolling
horses plunge. Who is it that inquires?
_Hnikar_.
and battles fought. Now they mayest call me the ancient of the rock,
Feng, or Fiolnir.--I desire a passage.
They turn to the land, the old man goes on board, and the storm
abates. Sigurd said:
men, which omens are the best--if to fight 'tis needful--at the swing
of glaves?
_Hnikar_.
glaves, a faithful fellowship, I think, is the dark raven's, with the
sworded warrior.
thou seest two renown-seeking men standing in the fore-court.
ash-boughs, it will victory to thee announce over helmed warriors, if
thou seest them go before thee.
have victory, who can see keenly at the play of swords, or to form the
wedge-array.
to battle goest. Wily Disir stand on either side of thee, and wish to
see thee wounded.
for 'tis uncertain whither he at eve may come. 'Tis bad to succumb to
fate.
Sigurd fought a great battle with Lyngvi, Hunding's son, and his
brothers, in which Lyngvi and his three brothers fell. After the
battle Regin said:
back of Sigmund's slayer. No son of king, who the earth reddens, and
the raven gladdens, is more excellent.
Sigurd returned home to Hialprek, when Regin instigated him to slay
Fafnir.
Sigurd and Regin went up to Gnitaheid, and there found Fafnir's slot,
or track, along which he crawled to the water. There on the way Sigurd
made a large pit, and went down into it. When Fafnir crawled from the
gold he blew forth venom, but it flew over Sigurd's head. When Fafnir
crept over the pit, Sigurd with his sword pierced him to the heart.
Fafnir shook himself, and beat with his head and tail. Sigurd leapt
from the pit, and each looked at the other. Fafnir said:
what people are thou the son? that thou in Fafnir reddenst thy
glittering falchion? Thy sword has pierced my heart.
Sigurd concealed his name, because it was the belief in those times,
that the words of dying persons were of great power, if they cursed an
enemy by his name.
_Sigurd_.
nor have I a father like the sons of men: alone I wander.
_Fafnir_.
thou begotten?
_Sigurd_.
Sigmund was my father named, my name is Sigurd, who with weapon have
assailed thee.
_Fafnir_.
incited to take my life? youth of the sparkling eyes! Thou hadst a
cruel father-- * * * *
_Sigurd_.
Rarely a man is bold, when of mature age, if in childhood he was
faint-hearted.
_Fafnir_.
would have seen thee fierce in fight. Now thou art a captive, taken in
war, and, 'tis said, slaves ever tremble.
_Sigurd_.
home? I am not a captive, although in war I was taken: thou hast found
that I am free.
_Fafnir_.
but I will say the truth. The jingling gold, and the gleed-red
treasure, those rings, shall be thy bane.
_Sigurd_.
for at some time each mortal shall hence to Hel depart.
_Fafnir_.
wight: In water thou shalt be drowned, if in wind thou rowest. All
things bring peril to the fated.
_Sigurd_.
know: who those Norns are, who help in need, and from babes loose the
mothers.
_Fafnir_.
common race. Some are of Æsir-race, some of Alfar-race, some are
Dvalin's daughters.
_Sigurd_.
know, how that holm is called, where Surt and the Æsir will
sword-liquor together mingle?
_Fafnir_.
Bifrost shall be broken, when they go forth, and their steeds in the
river swim.
treasures lay; stronger than all I thought myself to be; stronger I
found not many!
_Sigurd_.
fight: soon he finds, who among many comes, that no one is alone the
boldest.
_Fafnir_.
_Sigurd_.
so hard of heart. Fierceness so much the greater have the sons of men,
when they possess that helm.
_Fafnir_.
ride home. The jingling gold, and the gleed-red treasure, those rings,
shall be thy bane.
_Sigurd_.
the heath that lies. But lie thou, Fafnir! in the pangs of death,
until Hel have thee!
_Fafnir_.
the bane. Fafnir must, I trow, let forth his life: thine was the
greater might!
Regin had gone away while Sigurd slew Fafnir, but came back as Sigurd
was wiping the blood from his sword. He said:
slain: of all the men who tread the earth, thou art, I say, the
bravest born.
_Sigurd_.
victorious heroes, which is the bravest born. Many a one is bold, who
sword has never broken in another's breast.
_Regin_.
Gram, in the grass thou driest. My brother thou to death hast wounded,
yet in some degree was I the cause.
_Sigurd_.
hither. Treasure and life had still possess'd that glistening serpent,
hadst thou my anger not excited.
Regin then approached Fafnir and cut out his heart with a sword named
Ridill, and afterwards drank blood from his wound. He said:
hold to the fire. Of this refection I would fain partake, after that
drink of blood.
_Sigurd_.
With my strength I strove against the serpent's might, while in the
ling thou layest.
_Regin_.
thou the sword not used that I forged for thee, thy keen-edged glave.
_Sigurd_.
fight; for a brave man I have ever seen gain victory with a dull
sword.
of war; for the joyous it is better than for the sad, let come
whatever may.
Sigurd took Fafnir's heart and roasted it on a stick. When he thought
it roasted enough, and the blood frothed from it, he touched it with
his finger, to try whether it were quite done. He burnt his finger and
put it in his mouth; and when Fafnir's heart's blood touched his
tongue he understood the language of birds. He heard the eagles
chattering among the branches. One eagle said:
fire he roasts. Wise methinks were the ring-dispenser, if he the
glistening life-pulp ate.
_Second eagle_.
youth, who in him trusts: in rage he brings malicious words together,
the framer of evil will avenge his brother.
_Third eagle_.
Hel; then can he all the gold possess alone, the mass that under
Fafnir lay.
_Fourth eagle_.
counsel, my sisters! If he would bethink himself, and Hugin gladden.
There I expect the wolf, where his ears I see.
_Fifth eagle_.
had supposed, if he one brother lets depart, now he the other has of
life bereft.
_Sixth eagle_.
lies Regin, who has betrayed him.--He cannot guard against it.
_Seventh eagle_.
rings deprive him; then of that treasure thou,[63] which Fafnir owned,
sole lord wilt be!
_Sigurd_.
bear; for the brothers both shall speedily go hence to Hel.
Sigurd cut off the head of Regin, and then ate Fafnir's heart, and
drank the blood of both Regin and Fafnir. He then heard the eagles
saying:
things to fear. I a maid know by far the fairest, with gold adorned.
Couldst thou but her obtain!
_Second eagle_.
wayfarers where the good king a born daughter has; her wilt thou,
Sigurd! purchase with bridal gifts.
_Third eagle_.
with fire surrounded; sagacious men have it constructed of the
resplendent radiance of the flood.[64] _Fourth eagle_.
linden's bane.[65] Ygg whilom stuck a sleep-thorn in the robe of the
maid who would heroes choose.
from battle bore. May not Sigrdrifa's slumber break the son of
warriors,[66] against the Norns' decrees.
Sigurd rode along Fafnir's track to his lair, which he found open. The
doors and door-posts were of iron; of iron also were all the beams in
the house; but the treasure was buried in the earth. Sigurd found
there a great quantity of gold, and filled two chests with it. He took
thence the Oegis-helm, a golden corslet, the sword named Hrotti, and
many precious things, all which he laid on Grani; but the horse would
not proceed until Sigurd had mounted on his back.
Sigurd rode up the Hindarfiall, and directed his course southwards
towards Frankland. In the fell he saw a great light, as if a fire were
burning, which blazed up to the sky. On approaching it, there stood a
"skialdborg," and over it a banner. Sigurd went into the skialdborg,
and saw a warrior lying within it asleep, completely armed. He first
took the helmet off the warrior's head, and saw that it was a woman.
Her corslet was as fast as if it had grown to her body. With his sword
Gram he ripped the corslet from the upper opening downwards, and then
through both sleeves. He then took the corslet off from her, when she
awoke, sat up and, on seeing Sigurd, said:
cast from me the fallow bands?
_Sigurd_.
Sigmund's son has just now ript the raven's perch,[67] with Sigurd's
sword.
_She_.
mortals' sufferings! Odin is the cause that I have been unable to cast
off torpor.
Sigurd sat down and asked her name. She then took a horn filled with
mead, and gave him the _minnis-cup_.
_She_.
hail! With placid eyes behold us here, and here sitting give us
victory.
earth! Words and wisdom give to us noble twain, and healing hands[68]
while we live.
She was named Sigrdrifa, and was a Valkyria. She said that two kings
had made war on each other, one of whom was named Hialmgunnar; he was
old and a great warrior, and Odin had promised him victory. The other
was Agnar, a brother of Hoda, whom no divinity would patronize.
Sigrdrifa overcame Hialmgunnar in battle; in revenge for which Odin
pricked her with a sleep-thorn, and declared that henceforth she
should never have victory in battle, and should be given in marriage.
"But I said to him, that I had bound myself by a vow not to espouse
any man who could be made to fear." Sigurd answers, and implores her
to teach him wisdom, as she had intelligence from all regions:
_Sigrdrifa_.
and with bright glory: 'tis full of song, and salutary saws, of potent
incantations, and joyous discourses.
on thy sword's hilt grave them; some on the chapes, some on the guard,
and twice name the name of Ty.
wife thy trust betray, if thou in her confide. On the horn must they
be graven, and on the hand's back, and Naud[70] on the nail be scored.
the liquor cast: then I know thou wilt never have mead with treachery
mingled.
the child from women. In the palm they must be graven, and round the
joints be clasped, and the Disir prayed for aid.
afloat thy sailing steeds. On the prow they must be graven, and on the
helm-blade, and with fire to the oar applied. No surge shall be so
towering, nor waves so dark, but from the ocean thou safe shalt come.
and wounds know how to heal. On the bark they must be graven, and on
the leaves of trees, of those whose boughs bent eastward.
for injury with hate requite thee. Those thou must wind, those thou
must wrap round, those thou must altogether place in the assembly,
where people have into full court to go.
be than every other. Those interpreted, those graved, those devised
Hropt, from the fluid, which had leaked from Heiddraupnir's head, and
from Hoddropnir's horn.
bore. Then spake Mim's head its first wise word, and true sayings
uttered.
shining god, on Arvakr's ear, and on Alsvid's hoof, on the wheel which
rolls under Rognir's car, on Sleipnir's teeth, and on the sledge's
bands.
and the eagle's beak, on bloody wings, and on the bridge's end, on the
releasing hand, and on healing's track.
and in the welcome seat, on Gungnir's point, and on Grani's breast, on
the Norn's nail, and the owl's neb.
mead, and sent on distant ways: they are with the Æsir, they are with
the Alfar, some with the wise Vanir, some human beings have.
ol- (beer-) runes, and precious megin- (power-) runes, for those who
can, without confusion or corruption, turn them to his welfare. Use,
if thou hast understood them, until the powers perish.
armed warrior! my speech, or silence: think over it in thy mind. All
evils[72] have their measure.
_Sigurd_.
born a craven. Thy friendly counsels all I will receive, as long as
life is in me.
_Sigrdrifa_.
blameless. Take not hasty vengeance, although they raise up strife:
that, it is said, benefits the dead.
not true. Cruel bonds follow broken faith: accursed is the
faith-breaker.
not with a fool; for an unwise man oft utters words worse than he
knows of.
craven born, or else truly accused. Doubtful is a servant's testimony,
unless a good one thou gettest. On the next day let his life go forth,
and so men's lies reward.
the way, to go on is better than there to lodge, though night may
overtake thee.
have to fight: oft pernicious women by the way-side sit, who swords
and valour deaden.
benches sitting, let not their kindred's silver over thy sleep have
power. To kiss thee entice no woman.
tipsy talk, never while drunken quarrel with men of war: wine steals
the wits of many.
some their death, to some calamity: many are the griefs of men!
daring man, better it is for men to fight than to be burnt within
their dwelling.
and eschew deceit. Entice no maiden, nor wife of man, nor to
wantonness incite.
the earth thou findest them, whether from sickness they have died, or
from the sea, or are from weapons dead.
head be washed, combed, and wiped dry, ere in the coffin they are
laid: and pray for their happy sleep.
kinsman's promises, whose brother thou hast slain, or sire laid low.
there is a wolf in a young son, though he with gold be gladdened.
deadly injury. Wisdom and fame in arms a prince not easily acquires,
who shall of men be foremost.
course it may take. A long life, it seems to me the prince may [not]
enjoy;--fierce disputes will arise.
Sigurd said: "A wiser mortal exists not, and I swear that I will
possess thee, for thou art after my heart." She answered: "Thee I will
have before all others, though I have to choose among all men." And
this they confirmed with oaths to each other.
corpse-trees._ So Grimm understands the line; because that bird hops
about upon the armour as upon a tree.]
extinct in Iceland. Dr. Maurer relates a story of a man in Reykjavik
to whom it would seem to have been communicated by an elfin, in a
dream.]
writing or graving on thin leaves of beech (bok), whence our _book_.
Bok also signifies _acupictile_, vel _acupictum (velum, auloeum_).]
comes to the habitation of Heimir, who was married to Beckhild,
Brynhild's sister. Alsvid, Heimir's son, who was at play when Sigurd
arrived at the mansion, received him kindly, and requested him to stay
with him. Sigurd consented, and remained there a short time. Brynhild
was at that time with Heimir, and was weaving within a gold border the
great exploits of Sigurd.
One day, when Sigurd was come from the forest, his hawk flew to the
window at which Brynhild sat employed on weaving. Sigurd ran after it,
saw the lady, and appeared struck with her handiwork and beauty. On
the following day Sigurd went to her apartment, and Alsvid stood
outside the door shafting arrows. Sigurd said: "Hail to thee, lady!"
or "How fares it with thee?" She answered: "We are well, my kindred
and friends are living, but it is uncertain what any one's lot may be
till their last day." He sat down by her. Brynhild said: "This seat
will be allowed to few, unless my father comes." Sigurd answered: "Now
is that come to pass which thou didst promise me." She said: "Here
shalt thou be welcome." She then arose, and her four maidens with her,
and, approaching him with a golden cup, bade him drink. He reached
towards her and took hold of her hand together with the cup, and
placed her by him, clasped her round the neck, kissed her, and said:
"A fairer than thou was never born." She said: "It is not wise to
place faith in women, for they so often break their promise." He said:
"Better days will come upon us, so that we may enjoy happiness,"
Brynhild said: "It is not ordained that we shall live together, for I
am a shield-maiden (skjaldmær)." Sigurd said: "Then will our happiness
be best promoted, if we live together; for harder to endure is the
pain which herein lies than from a keen weapon." Brynhild said: "I
shall be called to the aid of warriors, but thou wilt espouse Gudrun,
Giuki's daughter." Sigurd said: "No king's daughter shall ensnare me,
therefore have not two thoughts on that subject; and I swear by the
gods that I will possess thee and no other woman." She answered to the
same effect. Sigurd thanked her for what she had said to him, and gave
her a gold ring. He remained there a short time in great favour.
Sigurd now rode from Heimir's dwelling with much gold, until he came
to the palace of King Giuki, whose wife was named Grimhild. They had
three sons, Gunnar, Hogni, and Guthorm. Gudrun was the name of their
daughter. King Giuki entreated Sigurd to stay there, and there he
remained a while. All appeared low by the side of Sigurd. One evening
the sorceress Grimhild rose and presented a horn to Sigurd, saying:
"Joyful for us is thy presence, and we desire that all good may befall
thee. Take this horn and drink." He took it and drank, and with that
drink forgot both his love and his vows to Brynhild. After that,
Grimhild so fascinated him that he was induced to espouse Gudrun, and
all pledged their faith to Sigurd, and confirmed it by oaths. Sigurd
gave Gudrun to eat of Fafnir's heart, and she became afterwards far
more austere than before. Their son was named Sigmund.
Grimhild now counselled her son Gunnar to woo Brynhild, and consulted
with Sigurd, in consequence of this design. Brynhild had vowed to wed
that man only who should ride over the blazing fire that was laid
around her hall. They found the hall and the fire burning around it.
Gunnar rode Goti, and Hogni Holknir. Gunnar turns his horse towards
the fire, but it shrinks back. Sigurd said: "Why dost thou shrink
back, Gunnar?" Gunnar answers: "My horse will not leap this fire,"
and prays Sigurd to lend him Grani. "He is at thy service," said
Sigurd. Gunnar now rides again towards the fire, but Grani will not go
over. They then changed forms. Sigurd rides, having in his hand the
sword Gram, and golden spurs on his heels. Grani runs forward to the
fire when he feels the spur. There was now a great noise, as it is
said:
flame to heaven itself: there ventured few chiefs of people through
that fire to ride, or to leap over.
the prince, the flame allayed before the glory-seeker with the bright
saddle that Rok had owned.
Brynhild was sitting in a chair as Sigurd entered. She asks who he is,
and he calls himself Gunnar Giuki's son. "And thou art destined to be
my wife with thy father's consent. I have ridden through the
flickering flame (vafrlogi) at thy requisition." She said: "I know not
well how I shall answer this." Sigurd stood erect on the floor resting
on the hilt of his sword. She rose embarrassed from her seat, like a
swan on the waves, having a sword in her hand, a helmet on her head,
and wearing a corslet. "Gunnar," said she, "speak not so to me, unless
thou art the foremost of men; and then thou must slay him who has
sought me, if thou hast so much trust in thyself." Sigurd said:
"Remember now thy promise, that thou wouldst go with that man who
should ride through the flickering flame." She acknowledged the truth
of his words, stood up, and gave him a glad welcome. He tarried there
three nights, and they prepared one bed. He took the sword Gram and
laid it between them. She inquired why he did so. He said that it was
enjoined him so to act towards his bride on their marriage, or he
would receive his death. He then took from her the ring called
Andvaranaut, and gave her another that had belonged to Fafnir. After
this he rode away through the same fire to his companions, when Gunnar
and he again changed forms, and they then rode home.
Brynhild related this in confidence to her foster-father Heimir, and
said: "A king named Gunnar has ridden through the flickering flame,
and is come to speak with me; but I told him that Sigurd alone might
so do, to whom I gave my vow at Hindarfiall, and that he only was the
man." Heimir said that what had happened must remain as it was.
Brynhild said: "Our daughter Aslaug thou shalt rear up here with
thee." Brynhild then went to her father, King Budli, and he with his
daughter Brynhild went to King Giuki's palace. A great feasting was
afterwards held, when Sigurd remembered all his oaths to Brynhild, and
yet kept silence. Brynhild and Gunnar sat at the drinking and drank
wine.
One day Brynhild and Gudrun went to the river Rhine, and Brynhild went
farther out into the water. Gudrun asked why she did so? Brynhild
answered: "Why shall I go on along with thee in this more than in
anything else?" "I presume that my father was more potent than thine,
and my husband has performed more valorous deeds, and ridden through
the blazing fire. Thy husband was King Hialprek's thrall." Gudrun
answered angrily: "Thou shouldst be wiser than to venture to vilify my
husband, as it is the talk of all that no one like to him in every
respect has ever come into the world; nor does it become thee to
vilify him, as he was thy former husband, and slew Fafnir, and rode
through the fire, whom thou thoughtest was King Gunnar; and he lay
with thee, and took from thee the ring Andvaranaut, and here mayest
thou recognize it." Brynhild then looking at the ring, recognized it,
and turned pale as though she were dead. Brynhild was very taciturn
that evening, and Gudrun asked Sigurd why Brynhild was so taciturn. He
dissuaded her much from making this inquiry, and said that at all
events it would soon be known.
On the morrow, when sitting in their apartment, Gudrun said: "Be
cheerful, Brynhild! What is it that prevents thy mirth?" Brynhild
answered: "Malice drives thee to this; for thou hast a cruel heart."
"Judge not so," said Gudrun. Brynhild continued: "Ask about that only
which is better for thee to know; that is more befitting women of high
degree. It is good, too, for thee to be content, as all goes according
to thy wishes." Gudrun said: "It is premature to glory in that: this
forebodes something; but what instigates thee against us?" Brynhild
answered: "Thou shalt be requited for having espoused Sigurd; for I
grudge thee the possession of him." Gudrun said: "We knew not of your
secret." Brynhild answered: "We have had no secret, though we have
sworn oaths of fidelity; and thou knowest that I have been deceived,
and I will avenge it." Gudrun said: "Thou art better married than thou
deservest to be, and thy violence must be cooled." "Content should I
be," said Brynhild, "didst thou not possess a more renowned husband
than I." Gudrun answered: "Thou hast as renowned a husband; for it is
doubtful which is the greater king." Brynhild said: "Sigurd overcame
Fafnir, and that is worth more than all Gunnar's kingdom, as it is
said:
"Sigurd the serpent slew, and that henceforth shall be by none
forgotten, while mankind lives: but thy brother neither dared through
the fire to ride, nor over it to leap."
Gudrun said: "Grani would not run through the fire under King Gunnar:
but he [Gunnar] dared to ride." Brynhild said: "Let us not contend: I
bear no good will to Grimhild." Gudrun said: "Blame her not; for she
is towards thee as to her own daughter." Brynhild said: "She is the
cause of all the evil which gnaws me. She presented to Sigurd the
pernicious drink, so that he no more remembered me." Gudrun said:
"Many an unjust word thou utterest, and this is a great falsehood."
Brynhild said: "So enjoy Sigurd as thou hast not deceived me, and may
it go with thee as I imagine." Gudrun said: "Better shall I enjoy him
than thou wilt wish; and no one has said he has had too much good with
me at any time." Brynhild said: "Thou sayest ill and wilt repent of
it. Let us cease from angry words, and not indulge in useless prattle.
Long have I borne in silence the grief that dwells in my breast: I
have also felt regard for thy brother. But let us talk of other
things." Gudrun said: "Your imagination looks far forward."
Brynhild then lay in bed, and King Gunnar came to talk with her, and
begged her to rise and give vent to her sorrow; but she would not
listen to him. They then brought Sigurd to visit her and learn whether
her grief might not be alleviated. They called to memory their oaths,
and how they had been deceived, and at length Sigurd offered to marry
her and put away Gudrun; but she would not hear of it. Sigurd left the
apartment, but was so greatly affected by her sorrow that the rings of
his corslet burst asunder from his sides, as is said in the
Sigurdarkvida:
"Out went Sigurd from that interview into the hall of kings, writhing
with anguish; so that began to start the ardent warrior's iron-woven
sark off from his sides."
Brynhild afterwards instigated Gunnar to murder Sigurd, saying that he
had deceived them both and broken his oath. Gunnar consulted with
Hogni, and revealed to him this conversation. Hogni earnestly strove
to dissuade him from such a deed, on account of their oaths. Gunnar
removed the difficulty, saying: "Let us instigate our brother Guthorm;
he is young and of little judgment, and is, moreover, free of all
oaths; and so avenge the mortal injury of his having seduced
Brynhild." They then took a serpent and the flesh of a wolf, and had
them cooked, and gave them to him to eat, and offered him gold and a
large realm, to do the deed, as is said:
"The forest-fish they roasted, and the wolf's carcase took, while
some to Guthorm dealt out gold; gave him Geri's[74] flesh with his
drink, and many other things steeped therein."
With this food he became so furious, that he would instantly
perpetrate the deed. On this it is related as in the Sigurdarkvida,
when Gunnar and Brynhild conversed together.]
inserted in some paper manuscripts of the Edda, and containing matter
probably derived from the lost poems relative to Sigurd and Brynhild,
are printed in the Stockholm edition of the Edda. They are also given
by Afzelius in his Swedish version, and partially in Danish by Finn
Magnusen in his edition. A complete translation into Danish of the
entire Saga has since been given, by Prof. Rafn at Copenhagen.]
for _wolf_ in general.]
his conflict, received the pledge of friendship from the two brothers;
oaths exchanged the bold of deed.
youthful daughter. Drank and conversed, many days together, Sigurd the
young and Giuki's sons.
youthful Volsung, rode in company, who knew the way. He would have
possessed her, if her possess he might.
between them; nor the damsel did he kiss, nor did the Hunnish king to
his arm lift her. He the blooming maid to Giuki's son delivered.
death-day, of any crime, that could be a stain, or thought to be:
intervened therein the grisly fates.
speak: "Sigurd must be mine; I must die, or that blooming youth clasp
in my arms."
consort, and I am Gunnar's. The hateful Norns long suffering have
decreed us."
icebergs, every eve, when he and Gudrun had to their couch withdrawn,
and Sigurd her in the coverings wrapt, the Hunnish king his wife
caressed.
vengeful thoughts."
shalt wholly lose my land, and myself also. Never shall I be happy,
king! with thee.
relations; there will I remain, and slumber life away, unless thou
Sigurd cause to be slain, and a king become than the other greater.
longer be fostered. For whom will vengeance be the easier to appease,
if the son lives?"
revolved, sat the whole day; he knew not well, nor could devise, what
were most desirable for him to do, or were most fitting to be done,
when he should find himself of the Volsung bereft, and in Sigurd a
great loss sustain.
that from their royal state women withdrew. Hogni he then to counsel
summoned, in whom he placed the fullest trust.
the chief of women: rather will I my life lay down than that fair
one's treasures lose.
command the ore of Rhine, and at ease over riches rule, and in
tranquillity happiness enjoy."
by the sword to break sworn oaths, oaths sworn, and plighted faith.
people rule, and the Hun lives, that warlike chief; nor on earth, a
race more excellent, if we five sons long shall foster, and the good
progeny can increase.
importunity is over-great.
deed prepare: he is free from sworn oaths, sworn oaths, and plighted
faith."
Sigurd stood his sword.
after the fierce assassin; to Guthorm flew dartlike Gram's gleaming
steel from the king's hand.
his feet's part fell backwards on the place.
side: but she awoke of joys bereft, when in the blood of Frey's friend
she swam.
heart rose in his bed. "Weep not, Gudrun! so cruelly, my blooming
bride! thy brothers live.
house; among themselves they recently have dark and evil counsels
devised.
the trysting with them ride. Full well I know how this has befallen:
Brynhild the sole cause is of all the evil.
sinned not; affinity I held sacred, and sworn oaths; thence forward I
was called his consort's friend."
she struck her hands together, that the beakers on the wall responsive
rang, and in the court the geese loudly screamed.
whole soul, when in her bed she listened to the loud lament of Giuki's
daughter.
thou barbarous woman! glad on thy couch, as if good awaited thee. Why
hast thou lost that beauteous colour? authoress of crime! Methinks to
death thou art doomed.
we should lay Atli low, that thou shouldst see thy brother's
blood-streaming sore, his gory wounds shouldst have to bind."
Gunnar! complete is thy work of death. Little does Atli thy hatred
fear; his life will outlast thine, and his might be ever greater.
we resolved on crimes. I was o'er-young and unrestrained, with wealth
endowed, in my brother's house.
our dwelling, three on horseback, powerful kings: would that journey
had never been!
Grani's back. In eyes he did not you resemble, nor was at all in
aspect like: yet ye thought yourselves mighty kings.
divided, nor gold nor lands, unless I let myself be married, nor grant
me any part of the acquired gold, which he to me a girl had given to
possess, and to me a child in moneys counted.
conflict, and death dispense, valiant in arms, for my brother's
quarrel. That would then be world-widely known, and to many a one
bring heartfelt anguish.
pleasing the treasures to accept, the red-gold rings of Sigmund's
son: nor did I another's gold desire; him alone I loved, none other.
Menskogul[75] had not a changing mind.
funeral rites completed; for never shall the heavy-hearted woman with
another's husband pass her life. Then will my wrongs be all avenged."
laid his hands; all drew nigh, yet each one singly, through honest
feeling, to dissuade her.
from her long journey.
to the hall be summoned, thine with, mine--now 'tis most needful--to
see if we can hinder my consort's fatal course, till from our speech a
hindrance may come: then let us leave necessity to rule."
journey, whence may she never born again return. Unblest she came on
her mother's lap, born in the world for ceaseless misery, for many a
man's heartfelt sorrow."
distributed. She was viewing all she owned: hungry female thralls and
chamber-women. She put on her golden corslet--no good meditated--ere
herself she pierced, with the sword's point.
the glave, on her last counsels thought.
receive from me. To every one I give a gilded necklace,[76]
needle-work and coverlets, splendid weeds."
gave: "Too many are there dead: we will yet live, still be hungry
hall-servants, to do what fitting is."
words in answer uttered: "I desire that none, dead to entreaty, should
by force, for our sake, lose their life.
meal,[77] when ye go hence me to seek.
is thy bright consort. Thy vessel will not be always afloat, though I
shall have my life resigned.
that wise woman has by the king sad memorials, after her consort's
death.
the clear day, than the sun's beam, will Svanhild be.
of many men: not to her wish will she be married; Atli will come her
to espouse, Budli's son, my brother.
had deceived: robbed I was of happiness, while my life lasted.
in secret ye will each other meet. She will love thee, as I had done,
if us a better fate had been allotted.
thou be cast.
soul resign, his prosperity, and cease to live; for Gudrun in her
vengeance him in his bed will slay, through bitterness of spirit, with
the sword's sharp edge.
first consort followed, had but good counsel been to her given, or she
a soul possessed resembling mine--
life. She will be borne on towering billows to King Jonakr's paternal
soil. Doubts will be in the resolves of Jonakr's sons.
Sigurd's. Her will destroy Bikki's counsel; for Jormunrek for evil
lives. Then will have passed away all Sigurd's race, and Gudrun's
tears will be the more.
my last request: Let in the plain be raised a pile so spacious, that
for us all like room may be, for those who shall have died with
Sigurd.
corpse-cloth, and multitude of slain. Let them burn the Hun[78] on the
one side of me;
slaves, with collars splendid, two at our heads, and two hawks; then
will all be equally distributed.
keen-edged iron, so again be placed, as when we both one couch
ascended, and were then called by the name of consorts.
with splendid ring, if my train him hence shall follow. Then will our
procession appear not mean.
gentle birth, fostered with me, and with my patrimony, which to his,
daughter Budli gave.
me power of speech. My voice fails, my wounds swell: truth only I have
uttered; so I will cease."
name to herself, which is a compound of men, _necklace, monile_, and
Skogul, the name of a Valkyria.]
laces with ornaments attached to them; if these resembled the sun or
moon they were called Sigli, _suns_ (such were those here spoken of);
and such was the necklace worn by Freyia, the bright goddess of the
Vanir.]
_Gunnar_.
murderous thoughts? What injury has Sigurd done thee, that thou the
hero wilt of life bereave?"
_Brynhild_.
a time deceived me when he should have been of all oaths most
observant."
_Hogni_.
to execute. She grudges Gudrun her happy marriage, and thee,
possession of herself." * * *
the wolf, before they might, eager for crime, on the mighty man lay
their hands.
all uttered: "Where is now Sigurd, lord of warriors, seeing that my
kinsmen foremost ride?"
with our swords; his grey steed bends o'er the dead chief."
arms and lands. Sigurd would alone over all have ruled, had he a
little longer life retained.
heritage and the Goths' people, when he five sons, for the fall of
hosts, eager for warfare, had begotten."
her whole heart: "Well shall ye enjoy lands and subjects, now the
daring king ye have caused to fall."
most atrocious: may fiends have Gunnar, Sigurd's murderer! Souls
malevolent vengeance awaits."
screamed: "With your blood will Atli his sword's edges redden; the
oaths ye have sworn your slaughter shall dissolve."
of all kinds pass: all sank in sleep, when to rest they went. Gunnar
alone was wakeful longer than all:
warlike chief in his mind pondered, what during the conflict the raven
and the eagle were ever saying, as they rode home.
little ere day: "Urge me or stay me--the mischief is perpetrated--my
sorrow to pour forth, or to suppress it."
conduct, that weeping she should begin to speak of what she laughing
had desired.
was dead; my bed was cold; and thou, king! wast riding of joy bereft,
with fetters loaded, to a hostile host. So will ye all, race of
Niflungs! be of power deprived, perjurers as ye are!
both let flow; now hast thou him ill for all that requited, because he
would prove himself foremost.
me, how the warlike chief whilom held sacred his oath towards the
youthful prince.
us both: outward its edges were with fire wrought, but with venom
drops tempered within."
From this lay, in which the death of Sigurd is related, it appears
that he was slain without doors, while some relate that he was slain
sleeping in his bed: but the Germans say he was slain out in the
forest; and it is told in the "Gudrunarkvida hin Forna," that Sigurd
and the sons of Giuki had ridden to the public assembly (thing) when
he was slain. But it is said by all, without exception, that they
broke faith with him, and attacked him while lying down and
unprepared.
Gudrun sat over Sigurd dead; she wept not as other women, although
ready to burst with sorrow. Both men and women, came to console her,
but that was not easy. It is said by some that Gudrun had eaten of
Fafnir's heart, and therefore understood the talk of birds. This is
also sung of Gudrun:
over Sigurd sat. No sigh she uttered, nor with her hands beat, nor
wailed, as other women.
to divert her. Gudrun could not shed a tear, such was her affliction;
ready she was to burst.
each of them told her sorrows, the bitterest she had known.
most joyless: of five consorts I the loss have suffered; of two
daughters, sisters three, and brothers eight; I alone live."
dead consort, and her soul's anguish for the king's fall.
to recount: my seven sons, in the south land, my spouse the eighth, in
conflict fell.
deluded; the waves struck on the ship's timbers.
tombed, their funeral rites to prepare was mine. All this I underwent
in one half-year, and to me no one consolation offered.
half-year. Then had I to adorn, and tie the shoes, of the Hersir's
wife, each morn.
nowhere master found I a better, but mistress no where a worse."
dead consort, and her soul's anguish for the king's fall.
fosterer, wise as thou art, with a young wife fittingly talk." The
king's body she forbade to be longer hidden.
towards his wife's knees: "Behold thy loved one, lay thy mouth to his
lip, as if thou wouldst embrace the living prince."
dripping with blood, the chief's sparkling eyes closed in death, his
kingly breast cleft by the sword.
loosed, her cheeks grew red, and a flood of tears fell to her knees.
spontaneously flowed, and at the same time screamed the geese in the
court, the noble birds, which the lady owned.
the most ardent among living beings upon earth: thou hadst delight
nowhere, sister mine! save with Sigurd."
Giuki's sons, as is the garlick out from the grass which grows, or a
bright stone on a thread drawn, a precious gem on kings.
Herian's Disir; now I am as little as the leaf oft is in the
storm-winds, after the chieftain's death.
have caused, Giuki's sons have caused my affliction, and their
sister's tears of anguish.
oaths. Gunnar! thou wilt not the gold enjoy; those rings will be thy
bane, for the oaths thou to Sigurd gavest.
saddled, and Brynhild they went to woo, that which accursed, in an
evil hour!"
and children, who thee, Gudrun! has caused to weep, and this morning
given thee runes of speech!"[79]
all! from those words. The evil destiny of princes thou hast ever
been; thee every billow drives of an evil nature; thou sore affliction
of seven kings, the greatest bane of friendship among women!"
offspring, is the sole cause of all the evil;
the fire of the serpent's bed.[80] Of that journey, I have paid the
penalty, that sight I have ever rued."
of Brynhild, Budli's daughter, fire gleamed forth; venom she snorted,
when she beheld the wounds of Sigurd.
Gudrun then went away to the forest and deserts, and travelled to
Denmark, where she stayed seven half-years with Thora, Hakon's
daughter. Brynhild would not outlive Sigurd. She caused her eight
thralls and five female slaves to be killed, and then slew herself
with a sword, as it is related in the "Sigurdarkvida in Skemma" (the
Short Lay of Sigurd).
After Brynhild's death two piles were made, one for Sigurd, which was
the first burnt; but Brynhild was burnt afterwards, and she was in a
chariot, which was hung with precious tapestry; so that it was said
that Brynhild drove in a chariot on the way to Hel, and passed through
a place in which a giantess dwelt. The giantess said:
Better had it beseemed thee to work broidery, than to seek after
another's husband.
Thou hast, golden dame! if thou desirest to know, gentle one! from thy
hands washed human blood."
_Brynhild_.
been. Of us, I trow, I shall the better seem, wherever men our
conditions know."
_Giantess_.
world; thou hast been the bane of Giuki's children, and their happy
house subverted."
_Brynhild_.
thou desirest to know, how Giuki's heirs made me both lovelorn and
perjured.
under an oak to be borne. Twelve years old was I, if thou desirest to
know, when to the youthful king oaths I gave.
knew me.
Hel to journey: I gave victory to the youthful brother of Oda, whereat
Odin became hostile to me.
their surfaces enclosed me; him he ordained my sleep to break, who in
no place could be made to fear.
destroyer of all wood: then bade that man only over it to ride, who me
the gold should bring, that under Fafnir lay.
foster-father ruled o'er the dwellings. He alone seemed there to all
superior, the Danish warrior, of the court.
brother been; neither of us might on the other, for eight nights, lay
a hand.
Sigurd's arms; then was I made aware of what I fain would not,--that
they had deceived me, when a mate I took.
living born. We two shall now, Sigurd and I pass our life together.
Sink thou of giant-kind!"
Valkyriur like the wives of Volund and his brothers, Agnar reduced
them under his subjection.]
Gunnar and Hogni then took all the gold, Fafnir's heritage. Dissension
prevailed afterwards between the Giukungs and Atli. He charged them
with being the cause of Brynhild's death. By way of reconciliation, it
was agreed that they should give him Gudrun in marriage, to whom they
administered an oblivious potion, before she would consent to espouse
Atli. Atli had two sons, Erp and Eitil, but Svanhild was the daughter
of Sigurd and Gudrun. King Atli invited Gunnar and Hogni to his
residence, and sent to them Vingi, or Knefrod. Gudrun was aware of
treachery, and sent them word in runes not to come; and to Hogni, as a
token, she sent the ring Andvaranaut, in which she had tied some
wolf's hair. Gunnar had sought the hand of Oddrun, Atli's sister, but
did not obtain it. He then married Glaumvor, and Hogni took Kostbera
to wife. Their sons were Solar, Snævar, and Giuki. When the Giukungs
came to Atli, Gudrun besought his sons to intercede for their lives,
but they would not. The heart of Hogni was cut out, and Gunnar was
cast into a pen of serpents. He struck his harp and lulled the
serpents, but an adder stung him to the liver.
King Theodric was with Atli, and had there lost the greater number of
his men. Theodric and Gudrun mutually bewailed their afflictions. She
related to him and said:
bower; my brothers I much loved, until me Giuki, with gold adorned,
with gold adorned, to Sigurd gave.
springing from the grass, or the high-limbed hart above the savage
beasts, or gleed-red gold above grey silver.
superior. They could not sleep, nor on affairs deliberate, before they
Sigurd had caused to die.
then himself came not. All the saddle-beasts were splashed with blood,
and with sweating faint, from the murderers.
steed to tell: then Grani shuddered, in the grass bowed down his
head. The steed knew that his master was no more.
guardian I inquired for my king.
"Beyond the river slaughtered lies Guthorm's murderer, and to the
wolves given.
ravens croak, the eagles scream, in their feast exulting; the wolves
howling round thy consort."
May thy heart by ravens be torn and scattered over the wide world,
rather than thou shouldst walk with men."
intense trouble: "Gudrun! thou wouldst have greater cause to weep, if
the ravens should tear my heart."
leavings. No sigh I uttered, nor with my hands beat, nor wailed, as
other women, when I heartbroken sat by Sigurd.
Sigurd. Better by far it seemed to me had the wolves taken my life, or
I had been burnt as a birchen tree.
lofty hall of Half I recognized. Seven half-years I with Thora
stayed, Hakon's daughter, in Denmark.
swans.
prince's nobles; red shields, Hunnish heroes, a sworded host, a helmed
host, a prince's following.
carved prows. We on our canvas wrought how Sigar and Siggeir both
contended southward in Fyen.
afflicted, she cast aside her needle-work, and her sons called oft and
earnestly, that she might know, who for her son would their sister
compensate, or for her consort slain the blood-fine pay?
Hogni also. * * * She then inquired who would go the steeds to saddle,
the chariot to drive, on horseback ride, the hawk let fly, arrows
shoot from the yew bow?
Jarizkar, then entered, to princes like. Red mantles had the
Langbard's men, corslets ornamented, towering helms; girded they were
with falchions, brown were their locks.
to my heart would speak, if for my many woes they might gain my
confidence, and I would in them trust.
my injuries might forget; it was mingled with Urd's power, with cold
sea-water, and with Son's blood.
nor could I comprehend them: the long lyng-fish[82] of the Haddings'
land, an uncut ear of corn: the wild-beasts' entrance.
and the acorn, the fire-stead's dew,[83] entrails of offerings,
swine's liver seethed; for that deadens strife.
the hall spoken. There to my feet three kings came, before she herself
sought to speak with me.
much of thy dead father; rings of red gold, Hlodver's halls, all the
hangings left by the fallen king.
work, so that it may delight thee. Over Budli's wealth thou alone
shalt rule, adorned with gold, and given to Atli."
beseems me not with Budli's son to increase a race, or life enjoy."
been the aggressors: so shouldst thou act as if yet lived Sigurd and
Sigmund, if sons thou bearest."
cherish a hope, since the bloodthirsty [wolf and] raven have together
cruelly drunk my Sigurd's heart's blood."
in much most excellent: him shalt thou have until age lays thee low,
or mateless be, if him thou wilt not take."
me: he will Gunnar's destruction perpetrate, and will cut out Hogni's
heart. I will not cease until the exulting strife-exciter's life I
shall have taken."
foreboded evil, and to her kindred dire misfortunes. "Lands I will
also give thee, people and followers, Vinbiorg and Valbiorg, if thou
wilt accept them; for life possess them, and be happy, daughter!"
reluctantly receive him. Never will he be to me a welcome consort, nor
my brothers' bale a protection to our sons."
Walish women were in chariots placed. For seven days o'er a cold land
we rode; but the second seven, we beat the waves; and the third seven,
we reached dry land.
opened, ere the court we entered.
kinsmen's death.
interpretation I fain would have. Methought that thou, Gudrun! Giuki's
daughter! with a treacherous sword didst pierce me through."
pleasure, a woman's anger. Against evil I will go burn thee, cure and
medicate thee, although to me thou art hateful."
fallen, which I wished to let grow: torn up with their roots, reddened
with blood, to table they were brought, and offered me to eat.
quarry, to the house of woes; seemed to me I ate their hearts with
honey swollen with blood, with sorrowing mind.
joy, both of them howled: seemed to me their bodies became dead
carcases: of the carrion I was compelled to eat."
white-locked ones take off the head; death-doomed they are within a
few nights, a little ere day: thy court will eat of them."
fate--That I will execute!"
serpent.]
Atli had a serving-woman named Herkia,[90] who had been his concubine.
She informed Atli that she had seen Thiodrek and Gudrun together;
whereat Atli was much afflicted. Then Gudrun said:
heart? Why never laughest thou? To thy jarls it would seem more
desirable, that thou with men wouldst talk, and on me wouldst look.
_Atli_.
Herkia has said, that thou and Thiodrek have under one covering slept,
and wantonly been in the linen wrapt.
_Gudrun_.
stone, that with me and Thiodrek nothing has passed, which to man and
wife only belongs;
single time. Other were our cogitations, when sorrowful we two sat to
converse.
one of those thirty men. Surround me with thy brothers, and with
mailed warriors; surround me with all thy noblest kinsmen.
cauldron."
dipt her hand.
loved brothers: with his sword would Hogni such wrong avenge: now I
must myself purify from crime."
the precious stones.[91] "See now, ye men! I am proved guiltless in
holy wise, boil the vessel as it may."
beheld the hand of Gudrun. "Now must Herkia to the cauldron go, she
who Gudrun had hoped to injure." No one has misery seen who saw not
that, how the hand there of Herkia was burnt. They then the woman led
to a foul slough.[92] So were Gudrun's wrongs avenged.
here appears as a slave or servant, is, according to that tradition,
the queen of Etzel or Atli, who did not marry Kreimhilt (Gudrun) until
after her death. The falsification of the story, the pitiful
subordinate part acted by Thiodrek, the perfect silence of all the
other poems on this event, and the ordeal of the cauldron,
sufficiently show that the poem is a later composition. P.E. Muller
(II., p. 319) ascribes it to Sæmund himself.]
There was a king named Heidrek, who had a daughter named Borgny. Her
lover was named Vilmund. She could not give birth to a child until
Oddrun, Atli's sister, came. She had been the beloved of Gunnar,
Giuki's son. Of this story it is here sung:
eastern land: no one was able, on the face of earth, help to afford to
Heidrek's daughter.
pains, from the stall she led her well-bridled steed, and on the swart
one the saddle laid.
to where a high hall stood. She the saddle snatched from the hungry
steed, and in she went along the court, and these words first of all
uttered:
in the Hunnish land?"
_Borgny_.
if thou canst help her.
_Oddrun_.
are Borgny's pains?
_Borgny_.
in a warm coverlet five whole winters, so that from her father she was
hidden.
the damsel's knee. Vehemently sang Oddrun, fervently sang Oddrun songs
of power over Borgny.
of Hogni's bane. Then began to speak the death-sick damsel, who before
had no word uttered.
other gods besides, as thou hast from me peril removed!"
of succour worthy: I vowed, and have performed what I then said--when
the princes the heritage divided, that I would ever help afford."
_Borgny_.
spirit most of thy words thou utterest; for I have been thy companion
upon the earth, as if from brothers we both were born.
_Oddrun_.
a compotation made. Such a case, saidst thou, would not thenceforth
happen, to any maiden, save to me alone."
great grief:
council of men. Life I enjoyed, and my father's wealth, five winters
only, while my father lived.
departed hence.
to Grimhild's son. He said no maiden could more excellent in the world
be born, if fate willed it not otherwise.
and lands around her. Earth slumbered, and the heavens above, when
Fafnir's bane her burgh first saw.
taken which Brynhild owned. It was not long--which was not
surprising--ere she discovered all those frauds.
great afflictions. Known it will be through every land of men, that
she caused herself to die with Sigurd.
Brynhild should. But he Brynhild bade a helmet take, said she a
Valkyria should become.
indemnity not small. He[94] besides offered for me fifteen vills, and
the load of Grani's sides, if he would accept them.
Giuki's son. Still we could not our loves withstand, but I my head
must lay upon the ring-breaker.
both together; but Atli said, that I would not crime commit, nor
scandal perpetrate. But such should no one for another ever deny, when
love has part.
me; and they came to where they ought not to have come, to where we
had one couch prepared.
Atli tell; but they forthwith hastened home, and it quickly to Atli
told.
she should have known it.[95]
Giuki's heirs. * * * Of Hogni they the heart cut out, and into a
serpent-pen the other cast.
* The brave king[96] began the harp to sound; for the prince of noble
race hoped that I to his aid might come.
sang.
The vessel we let float past the forest,[97] until I saw all Atli's
courts.
perish!--she Gunnar pierced to the heart; so that the hero I could not
save.
life retain; for I seemed the formidable sword-dispenser as myself to
love:
fate, my own and theirs." Each one lives as he best may. Now is ended
_Oddrun's lament_.
MSS., the Copenhagen editor favors the correction to sund (a _sound_
or _strait, the Sound_)?]
Gudrun, Giuki's daughter, avenged her brothers, as is well known. She
first killed Atli's sons, and afterwards Atli himself, and burnt the
palace with all the household. On these events was this lay composed.
his name. To Giuki's courts he came, and to Gunnar's hall, to the
seats of state,[99] and the glad potation:
ones[100] silence kept--the Huns' wrath they[101] feared. Then said
Knefrud, with chilling voice:--the southern warrior on a high bench
sat--
steed, through the unknown Murkwood, to pray you, Gunnar! that to his
bench ye come, with helms of state, Atli's home to visit.
helms, and of Huns a multitude, silver-gilt saddle-cloths, sarks
gory-red, the dart's obstruction, and bit-griping steeds.
javelins, and gilded prows, vast treasures, and Danp's towns, with
that famed forest, which men the Murkwood call."
thou, bold warrior? now suchlike we hear? Of no gold I knew on Gnita's
heath, to which we possess not other equal.
hilt is gold. My horse I know the best, and my sword the keenest; my
bow adorns my seat, my corslets are of gold, my helm and shield the
brightest, brought from the hall of Kiar: mine alone are better than
all the Hunnish ones.
a wolf's clothing wrapt? I think that she caution enjoins. Wolf's hair
I found twined in the red-gold ring: wolfish is the way we on our
errand ride."
counsellors, nor those who potent were. Then spake Gunnar, as beseemed
a king, great in his mead-hall, from his large soul:
cups of heroes, from the attendants' hands.
Gunnar perish; black-coated bears earth's fruit tear with their teeth,
to the dogs' delight, if Gunnar come not back."
court. Then said Hogni's youthful heir: "Go now, prudent and
prosperous, whither your wishes lead."
fly, through the unknown Murkwood. The whole Hunnish forest trembled
where'er the warriors rode; over the shrubless, all-green plains they
sped.
stood on that lofty fortress; the south people's hall was round with
benches set, with well-bound bucklers, and white shields, the
javelin's obstruction. There Atli drank wine in his Valhall: his
guards sat without, Gunnar and his men to watch, lest they there
should come with yelling dart, to excite their prince to conflict.
brothers both--beer had she little drunken--"Betrayed art thou now,
Gunnar! though strong, how wilt thou contend with the Huns' deadly
wiles? Go quickly from this hall!
state, to see the home of Atli; thou in the saddle wouldst have sat
whole sun-bright days, and o'er the pallid dead let the Norns weep,
the Hunnish shield-maids misery suffer; but Atli himself thou shouldst
into the serpent-pen have cast; but now the serpent-pen is for you two
reserved."
to seek the aid of men, of valiant heroes, over the rugged fells of
Rhine."
laid, and him fast bound.
thrust into the raging fire. So should a valiant man defend himself
from foes.
asked, if the Goths' lord would with gold his life redeem?
of the valiant chief, the king's son, with a dull-edged knife." * * *
They the heart cut out from Hialli's breast; on a dish bleeding laid
it, and it to Gunnar bare.
timid Hialli, unlike the heart of the bold Hogni; for much it trembles
as in the dish it lies: it trembled more by half, while in his breast
it lay."
crest-crasher; no lament uttered he. All bleeding on a dish they laid
it, and it to Gunnar bare.
of the bold Hogni, unlike the heart of the timid Hialli; for it little
trembles, as in the dish it lies: it trembled less, while in his
breast it lay.
from the treasures be. In my power alone is all the hidden Niflungs'
gold, now that Hogni lives not.
longer, as I alone survive. Rhine shall possess men's baleful metal,
the mighty stream, the As-known Niflungs' heritage. In the rolling
water the choice rings shall glitter, rather than on the hands of the
Huns' children shine.
steeds, with strife-thorns[105] surrounded. Gudrun perceived the
heroes' peril, she from tears refrained, on entering the hall of
tumult.
oft-sworn oaths, formerly taken--by the southward verging sun, and by
Sigty's hill, the secluded bed of rest, and by Ullr's ring." Yet
thence the more did the bit-shaker[106] the treasure's guardian, the
warrior chief, drag to death.
which was within with serpents over-crawled. But Gunnar there alone a
harp in wrathful mood with his hand struck: the strings resounded. So
should a daring chief, a ring-dispenser, gold from men withhold.
from the murder. Din was in the court with horses thronged, men's
weapon-song, from the heath they were come.
duty to the king. "Thou canst, O King! joyful in thy hall receive
from Gudrun the arms of the departed."
hall together the Huns were counted. Long-bearded, bold, the warriors
entered.
the wondrous lady to the chiefs; and reluctantly to the pallid Atli
the festal dainties offered, and uttered words of hate.
slaughter-gory, with honey eaten. I resolved that thou, bold chief!
shouldst of a human dish eat at thy feasting, and to the place of
honour send it. Henceforth thou wilt not to thy knees call Erp and
Eitil, joyous with beer the two: thou wilt not henceforth, see them
from thy middle seat, gold-dispersing, javelins shafting, manes
clipping, or horses urging."
beneath the costly hangings. The children of the Huns wept, all wept
save Gudrun, who never wept, or for her bear-fierce brothers, or her
dear sons, young, simple, whom she had borne to Atli.
household gifted. Fate she let ripen, but the bright gold flow. The
woman spared not the treasure-houses.
was 'gainst Gudrun guarded. Oft had their sport been better, when they
lovingly embraced each other before the nobles.
death-bent hand, and the dogs loosed, out at the hall-door drove them,
and the lady wakened the household with burning brand. That vengeance
she for her brothers took.
brothers' murder were from the dark den[108] returned. The old
structures fell, the treasure-houses smoked, the Budlungs' dwelling.
Burnt too were the shield-maids within, their lives cut short; in the
raging fire they sank.
bear, to avenge her brothers. That bright woman had to three kings of
men the death-doom borne, before she died.
Yet more clearly is this told in "Atlamalum inum Groenlenzkum" (the
Groenland lay of Atli).
helmets (see Strophes 3 and 16). Its meaning is doubtful: it has been
rendered _iron-bound_, _brass-bound_, _hearth-encircling_, _curved
like an eagle's beak_, etc. Benches and helmets of ceremony are
evidently intended, probably ornamented with brass-work or figures of
eagles. But to whichever substantive applied, I take its meaning to be
the same.]
her brothers, as a warning, in which a wolf's hair was entwined,
together with a note in runes, which were falsified by Vingi.]
signification.]
compact made, which by pledges they confirmed, a secret consultation
held: terrible it was to them after, and to Giuki's sons likewise, who
were betrayed.
was Atli, though he possessed sagacity: he felled a mighty column,
strove hardly against himself; with speed he messengers despatched,
that his wife's brothers should come quickly.
order she had heard, that in secret they had said: the sage lady was
at a loss: fain would she help them; they[109] o'er the sea must sail,
but she herself could not go.
him; of ill he was the bearer. Then departed Atli's messengers,
through the branched firth, for where the bold warriors dwelt.
thought they of guile, when they were come; they the gifts accepted,
which the prince sent them, on a column hung them, and of no evil
thought.
cautious, and them both greeted. Glad was also Glaumvor, Gunnar's
consort, the prudent dame her duty forgot not, she to the guests' need
attended.
was manifest, had they but reflected! Gunnar then promised, if only
Hogni would, but Hogni refused what the other proposed.
many horns passed round, until it seemed they had full drunken.
Cunning was Kostbera, she could runes interpret; she the letters read
by the bright fire;--her tongue she had to guard between both her
gums--so perverted were they, it was difficult to understand them.
and concealed it not, to the prince wisely said it as soon as she
awoke.
fully prudent: go another time.
dame has not this time invited thee. At one thing I wonder most, I
cannot even conceive, why so wise a woman so confusedly should grave;
for it is so set down as if it intimated death to you both, if you
should straightway come. Either she has left out a letter, or others
are the cause."[110]
them, nor will I into it inquire, unless we have to make requital.
The king will gift us with gleed-red gold. I never fear, though we may
hear of terror."
entertainment there will ye at this time find. Hogni! I have dreamed,
I will not conceal it: in an evil hour ye will go, or so at least I
fear.
towering flame rushed through my dwelling."
_Hogni_.
will quickly burn where thou the coverlet sawest."
_Kostbera_.
his talons shook, that we were terror-stricken; by his mouth held many
of us, so that we were helpless: there, too, was a din far from
little."
_Hogni_.
sawest will be a storm from the east."
_Kostbera_.
will largely concern us. He sprinkled all with blood: from his threats
I thought it to be the 'ham'[111] of Atli."
_Hogni_.
meant, when we of eagles dream. Sound is the heart of Atli, dream thou
as thou mayest." With this they ended: all speeches have an end.
perceived that her dreams were ill-boding, adverse to Gunnar's going
to and fro.
be hanged, that serpents ate thee, that I inter'd thee living, that
the Powers' dissolution came--Divine thou what that portends.
a dream to a consort to recount--methought a lance was thrust through
thy middle: wolves howled on every side."
_Gunnar_.
the flight of javelins."
_Glaumvor_.
roared violently, rushed o'er the benches, brake the feet of you
brothers twain; nothing the water spared: something will that portend!
were they: they would choose thee, forthwith invited thee to their
seats. I ween thy Disir have forsaken thee."
_Gunnar_.
journey we shall not shrink, as it is decreed to go: very probable it
seems that our lives will be short."
up: the others fain would stay them. The five journeyed together, of
"hus-carls" there were present twice that number--it was ill
devised--Snævar and Solar, they were Hogni's sons; Orkning he was
named, who them accompanied, a gentle shield-bearer was he, the
brother of Hogni's wife.
would their wives have stayed them, they would not be stayed.
to her seemed fitting: "I know not whether ye will requite us as we
would: with treachery came the guest, if aught of ill betide."
have, if towards you he lies! the gallows hold him, if aught against
peace he meditates!"
and may success attend you: may it be as I pray, and if nothing
hinder!"
prudent! whatever may befall. Many say the same, though with great
difference; for many little care how they depart from home."
their fates were severed, and their ways divided.
bending the waves they beat, ardently plied: their oar-bands were
broken, the rowlocks shattered. They made not the vessel fast before
they quitted it.[113]
stand that Budli had possessed. Loud creaked the latticed gates, when
Hogni knocked.
'tis perilous to enter; I quickly enticed you to perdition; ye shall
forthwith be slain. With fair words I prayed your coming, though guile
was under them. But just bide here, while a gallows I prepare."
fearful that was to be proved:--"Think not to frighten us: try that
seldom. If one word thou addest, thou wilt thy harm prolong."
while life within him throbbed.
prepared so that a fence was between them. Words they bandied, all
with rage boiling: "Already had we resolved to take your lives away."
_Hogni_.
unprepared, and we one have felled, smitten to death: one of your host
was he."
they stretched forth, and their bowstrings seized; sharply shot, and
with shields themselves protected.
the hall they a thrall heard speak.
with necklaces, she tore them all asunder; so hurled the silver, that
the rings in shivers flew.
of fear, and the comers hailed, turned to the Niflungs: that was her
last greeting, truth attended it; more words she said:
one resist--and yet must you come hither." Wisely she asked: might
they not be appeased? No one consented, all answered no.
deadly deed she meditated, and her robe dashed aside, a naked falchion
seized, and her kinsmen's lives defended: skilful she was in warfare,
where her hand she applied.
struck down,--he must henceforth be borne--so she the conflict
managed, that she his foot struck off. Another too she smote, so that
he never rose, to Hel she sent him: her hand trembled not.
excelled all else which Giuki's sons performed. So 'tis said the
Niflungs, while yet they lived, with swords maintained the fight,
corslets rent, helmets hewed, as their hearts prompted.
morn, and the forenoon, ere the fight was ended, the field flowed with
blood, until eighteen had fallen: Bera's two sons, and her brother,
had them overcome.
look around; this is long of you. We were thirty warlike thanes,
eleven survive: the chasm is too great. We were five brothers, when
Budli died; now has Hel the half, two lie slain.
woman! of which I have no benefit: peace we have seldom had, since
thou among us camest. Of kinsmen ye have bereft me, of riches often
wronged. To Hel my sister ye have sent; that is to me most bitter."
_Gudrun_.
my mother thou didst take, and for her treasures murder; my gifted
niece with hunger thou didst cause to perish. Laughable to me it
seems, when thou sorrows dost recount. The gods are to be thanked,
that it goes ill with thee."
_Atli_.
woman: I would fain see it. Strive so to do, that Gudrun may lament.
Might I but see that in her lot she joys not!
this ye shall do. Gunnar the fierce of soul to a gallows fasten; do
the work thoroughly, lure up the serpents.
_Hogni_.
myself: I have ere now things much harder proved. Ye had a hindrance
while unscathed we were: now are we so wounded that our fate thou
mayest command.
let us save. Let us do half the work; he is death-worthy. As long as
he lives a slug he will ever be.
he could be a whiner, he clomb into every nook: their conflict was his
bane, as he the penalty must pay; and the day sad, when he must from
the swine die, from all good things, which he had enjoyed.
Howled the wretched thrall, ere the point he felt; declared that he
had time the gardens to manure, the vilest offices to do, if from
death he might escape. Joyful indeed was Hialli, could he but save his
life.
intercede, that he may escape!--"Less 'tis, I say, for me to play this
game myself. Why shall we here desire to listen to that screaming?"
bold warriors, the sentence longer to delay. Then laughed Hogni;
heard the sons of day how he could hold out: torment he well endured!
so strike it, that women wept, and the men sobbed, who best could hear
it. He the noble queen counselled: the rafters burst asunder.
caused their deeds to live.
sagacious woman told the evil, and bitterly reproached her. "It is now
morning, Gudrun! thy loved ones thou hast lost; partly thou art the
cause that it has so befallen."
_Gudrun_.
await thee, when thou hast all proved. That heritage shall be left
thee--that I can tell thee--that ill shall never from thee go, unless
I also die.
_Atli_.
good we oft reject. With slaves I will console thee, with things most
precious, with snow-white silver, as thou thyself mayest desire.
_Gudrun_.
spurned for smaller injuries. Hard I was ever thought, now will that
be aggravated. I every grudge concealed, while Hogni lived.
in the wood grew up; Grimhild us adorned with gold and necklaces; for
my brothers' death never wilt thou indemnify me, nor ever do what
shall to me seem good.
hand sinks, if the arms wither; the tree inclines, if its root-fibres
are severed. Now, Atli! thou mayest alone over all here command.
guile was manifest, had he been on his guard. Dissembling then was
Gudrun, against her heart she could speak, made herself gay appear,
with two shields she played.[114]
same would Atli also for his own do.
too luxurious. The woman great of heart was stern, she warred on
Budli's race; on her spouse she would cruel vengeance wreak.
babes were terrified, and wept not, to their mother's bosom crept,
asked what she was going to do.
cut short your days."
will have short peace, if thou destroyest us in our blooming years,
thou desperate woman!" It fell out accordingly: she cut the throats of
both.
nowhere saw them?
_Gudrun._
daughter will not conceal it from thee. Little glad, Atli! wilt thou
be, when all thou learnest; great woe didst thou raise up, when thou
my brother slewest.
thee: now I have reminded thee. "It is now morning," saidst thou: I
yet it well remember; and it now is eve, when thou the like shalt
learn.
their skulls thou hast had for beer-cups; thy drink I prepared, I
their red blood have shed.
gave them. I said they were of calves,--it was long of thee
alone--thou didst leave none, voraciously didst devour, well didst ply
thy teeth.
part performed, though in it glory not.
_Atli._
blood my drink to mingle. Thou hast destroyed thy offspring, as thou
least shouldest; and to myself thou leavest a short interval from ill.
_Gudrun._
with such a prince. Thou hast already perpetrated crimes unexampled
among men of frantic cruelty, in this world: now thou hast added what
we have just witnessed. A great misdeed hast thou committed, thy
death-feast thou hast prepared.
_Atli._
thou have earned what thou hast ever sought.
_Gudrun._
will pass to another light.
words of hate: each was ill at ease.
he declared that he was Atli's deadly foe.
if he vengeance wreaked. Then was Atli slain, within a little space;
Hogni's son him slew, and Gudrun herself.
wounds, said he no binding needed. "Tell me most truly who has slain
Budli's son. I am hardly treated: of life I have no hope."
_Gudrun._
cause that thy life passes away; but partly Hogni's son, that thy
wounds make thee faint.
_Atli._
thee; 'tis bad to circumvent a friend, who well confided in thee.
Besought I went from home, to woo thee, Gudrun!
falsehood, as we have proved. Hither home thou earnest, us a host of
men attended; all was splendid on our journey.
abundance: largely we enjoyed them. Of all things there was plenty
partaken of by many.
acceptance, thralls thrice ten, seven fair female slaves: in such
things was honour; silver there was yet more.
lay, which Budli had left me. So didst thou undermine, dist allow me
nothing to receive. Thou didst my mother let often sit weeping: with
heart content I found not one of my household after.
_Gudrun._
seldom was, yet didst thou greatly aggravate it. Young brothers ye
fought together, among yourselves contended; to Hel went the half from
thy house: all went to ruin that should be for benefit.
invincible: from the land we departed, we followed Sigurd. We roved
about, each steered a ship; seeking luck we went, till to the east we
came.
yielded to us; that manifested fear. We from the forest freed him whom
we wished harmless, raised him to prosperity who nothing had
possessed.
was the young wife's grief, the widow's lot was hers. A torment to me
it seemed to come living to the house of Atli. A hero had possessed
me: sad was that loss!
thou didst gain thy cause, or others overcome; ever wouldst thou give
way, and never stand, lettest all pass off quietly, as ill beseemed a
king.
_Atli._
either: we have all suffered. Now act thou, Gudrun! of thy goodness,
and for our honour, when I forth am borne.
_Gudrun._
winding-sheet well wax, to enwrap thy corpse; will think of every
requisite, as if we had each other loved.
illustrious woman did all she had promised. The wise woman would go to
destroy herself; her days were lengthened: she died another time.
daughter famed for deeds, as Giuki begat: ever will live, in every
land, their oft-told tale, wherever people shall give ear.
Gudrun, had not been so completely erased as to leave no traces of
them; but that they were still sufficiently legible to enable Kostbera
to ascertain the real purport of the communication.]
attendant spirit.]
stake on a scaffold, to which the condemned to a death of torture was
bound hand and foot.]
sending it adrift, seems inconsistent with the later custom of
depositing it in a cist or coffin.]
Having slain Atli, Gudrun went to the sea-shore. She went out into the
sea, and would destroy herself, but could not sink. She was borne
across the firth to the land of King Jonakr, who married her. Their
sons were Sorli, Erp, and Hamdir. There was reared up Svanhild, the
daughter of Sigurd. She was given in marriage to Jormunrek the
Powerful. With him lived Bikki, who counselled Randver, the king's
son, to take her. Bikki told that to the king, who caused Randver to
be hanged, and Svanhild trodden under horses' feet. When Gudrun heard
of this she said to her sons:--
great affliction, when her sons the fierce-hearted Gudrun, in deadly
words, to slaughter instigated.
joyous words to speak, now Jormunrek your sister young in years has
with horses trodden, white and black, in the public way, with grey and
way-wont Gothic steeds?
as Hogni was. Her ye should seek to avenge, if ye had the courage of
my brothers, or the fierce spirit of the Hunnish kings."
Hogni's deed to praise, when Sigurd he from sleep awaked. Thy
blue-white bed-clothes were red with thy husband's gore, with
death-blood covered.
bitter, when thou thy sons didst murder. We young ones[117] could on
Jormunrek, acting all together, have avenged our sister.
stimulated to a sword-mote."
helms from the coffers drew, their ample corslets, and to her sons
them bore. The young heroes loaded their horses' shoulders.
mother to see, the warrior felled in the Gothic land, so that thou the
funeral-beer after us all may drink, after Svanhild and thy sons."
fore-court, and to recount, with tear-worn cheeks, sad of soul, her
calamities, in many ways.
consorts I have been borne to the house. Sigurd alone to me was better
than all, of whom my brothers were the murderers.
seemed to afflict me, when those chieftains to Atli gave me.
could not get revenge, ere I had severed the Hniflungs' heads.
would cast off their persecution; bore, and submerged me not the
towering billows; up on land I rose, because I was to live.
the third time, with a mighty king. I brought forth offspring,
guardians of the heritage, guardians of the heritage, Jonakr's sons.
loved the best. Svanhild was, in my hall, as was the sun-beam, fair to
behold.
her to the Gothic people. That is to me the hardest of all my woes,
that Svanhild's beauteous locks should in the mire be trodden under
horses' feet.
slew in his bed; though of all most cruel, when of Gunnar the
glistening serpents to the vitals crawled; but the most agonizing,
which to my heart flew, when the brave king's heart they while quick
cut out.
Guide, Sigurd! thy black steed, thy swift courser, hither let it run.
Here sits no son's wife, no daughter, who to Gudrun precious things
may give.
both were sitting, that thou, brave one, wouldst come to me from Hel's
abode, but I from the world to thee.
be. May it burn a breast full of woes! the fire round my heart its
sorrows melt!"
whom this tale of woes shall be recounted.
lament;[119] at early morn, men's afflictions, troubles of various
kinds; sorrows were quickened.
away,--few things are more ancient, it was by much earlier--when
Gudrun, Giuki's daughter, her young sons instigated Svanhild to
avenge.
horses trod to death, white and black, on the public way, with grey
and way-wont Gothic steeds.
survive,
forest, of kindred bereft, as the fir of branches; of joy deprived, as
is the tree of foliage, when the branch-spoiler comes in the warm
day."
care Hogni's deed to praise, when Sigurd they from sleep awaked on the
bed thou satst, and the murderers laughed.
thy husband's gore. When Sigurd perished, o'er the dead thou satst,
caredst not for mirth--so Gunnar willed it.
destruction: that proved for thyself the worse: therefore should every
one so against others use, for life's destruction, a sharp-biting
sword, that he harm not himself."
not speeches exchange: though words to each of you to me seem wanting.
What, Gudrun! dost thou desire, which for tears thou canst not utter?
drawn to the strife: for us both shalt thou, Gudrun! also have to
weep, who here sit fated on our steeds, far away to die."
journeyed over humid fells, on Hunnish steeds, murder to avenge.
horse's back--"Ill 'tis to a timid man to point out the ways." They
said the bastard[120] was over bold.
swarthy dwarf afford us aid?"
kin afford, as one foot to the other[121] [or, grown to the body, one
hand the other].
the other?"
for Hel's delight. They their strength diminished by a third part,
they their young kinsman caused to earth to sink.
high-born were clad in sumptuous raiment.
sister's son wounded on a gibbet, wind-cold outlaw-trees,[122] on the
town's west. Ever vibrated the ravens' whet: there to tarry was not
good.
horses' tramp no one heard, until a mindful man winded his horn.
warriors. "Take ye counsel, potent ones are come; before mighty men ye
have on a damsel trampled."
not for his corslet; with wine he struggled, shook his dark locks, on
his white shield looked, and in his hand swung the golden cup.
hall. I would them then with bowstrings bind, the good sons of Giuki
on the gallows hang."
she to her son--for that was threatened which ought not to
happen--"shall two men alone bind or slay ten hundred Goths in this
lofty burgh?"
lay in blood from the Goths' breasts flowing.
desire our coming, brothers of one mother, into thy burgh:[123] now
seest thou thy feet, seest thy hands Jormunrek! cast into the glowing
fire."
roars: "On the men hurl stones, since spears bite not, nor edge of
sword, nor point, the sons of Jonakr."
when thou that mouth didst ope. Oft from that mouth bad counsel
comes."
lacks much who wisdom lacks.
in fight, whom on the way we slew, that warrior brave--me the Disir
instigated--that man sacred to us, whom we resolved to slay.
ourselves we should contend, like the Norns' dogs, that voracious are
in the desert nurtured."
fallen by the sword, like eagles on a branch. Great glory we have
gained, though now or to-morrow we shall die. No one lives till eve
against the Norns' decree."
house's back.
This is called the Old Lay of Hamdir.
apposition to "early morn," in the following line. The swart Alfar are
meant, who were turned to stone if they did not flee from the light of
day. This is the best interpretation I can offer of this obscure
strophe.]
alluded to is their half-brother Erp, of whose story nothing more is
known. He, it appears, had preceded or outridden the others.]
and his cupbearer.]
_wolf_.]
off his hands and feet while he was asleep. Erp, had they not murdered
him, was to have cut off his head.]
(Sweden). It is related of him that he once gave a wayfaring woman, as
a recompense for her having diverted him, as much land in his realm as
she could plough with four oxen in a day and a night. This woman was,
however, of the race of the Æsir, and was called Gefjon. She took four
oxen from the north, out of Jotunheim (but they were the sons she had
had with a giant), and set them before a plough. Now the plough made
such deep furrows that it tore up the land, which the oxen drew
westward out to sea until they came to a sound. There Gefjon fixed the
land, and called it Sælund. And the place where the land had stood
became water, and formed a lake which is now called "The Water"
(Laugur), and the inlets of this lake correspond exactly with the
headlands of Sealund. As Skald Bragi the Old saith:--
"Gefjon drew from Gylfi,
Rich in stored up treasure,
The land she joined to Denmark.
Four heads and eight eyes bearing,
While hot sweat trickled down them,
The oxen dragged the reft mass
That formed this winsome island."
beheld with astonishment that whatever the Æsir willed took place; and
was at a loss whether to attribute their success to the superiority of
their natural abilities, or to a power imparted to them by the mighty
gods whom they worshipped. To be satisfied in this particular, he
resolved to go to Asgard, and, taking upon himself the likeness of an
old man, set out on his journey. But the Æsir, being too well skilled
in divination not to foresee his design, prepared to receive him with
various illusions. On entering the city Gylfi saw a very lofty
mansion, the roof of which, as far as his eye could reach, was covered
with golden shields. Thiodolf of Hvina thus alludes to Valhalla being
roofed with shields.
"Warriors all care-worn,
(Stones had poured upon them),
On their backs let glisten
Valhalla's golden shingles."
At the entrance of the mansion Gylfi saw a man who amused himself by
tossing seven small-swords in the air, and catching them as they fell,
one after the other. This person having asked his name, Gylfi said
that he was called Gangler, and that he came from a long journey, and
begged for a night's lodging. He asked, in his turn, to whom this
mansion belonged. The other told him that it belonged to their king,
and added, "But I will lead thee to him, and thou shalt thyself ask
him his name." So saying he entered the hall, and as Gylfi followed
the door banged to behind him. He there saw many stately rooms crowded
with people, some playing, some drinking, and others fighting with
various weapons. Gangler, seeing a multitude of things, the meaning of
which he could not comprehend, softly pronounced the following verse
(from the Havamal, st. i.):--
"Scan every gate
Ere thou go on,
With greatest caution;
For hard to say 'tis
Where foes are sitting
In this fair mansion."
He afterwards beheld three thrones raised one above another, with a
man sitting on each of them. Upon his asking what the names of these
lords might be, his guide answered: "He who sitteth on the lowest
throne is a king; his name is Har (the High or Lofty One); the second
is Jafnhar (_i.e_. equal to the High); but he who sitteth on the
highest throne is called Thridi (the Third)." Har, perceiving the
stranger, asked him what his errand was, adding that he should be
welcome to eat and drink without cost, as were all those who remained
in Hava Hall. Gangler said he desired first to ascertain whether there
was any person present renowned for his wisdom.
"If thou art not the most knowing," replied Har, "I fear thou wilt
hardly return safe. But go, stand there below, and propose thy
questions, here sits one who will be able to answer them."
of the gods?"
"In our language," replied Har, "he is called Alfadir (All-Father, or
the Father of all); but in the old Asgard he had twelve names."
"Where is this God?" said Gangler; "what is his power? and what hath
he done to display his glory?"
"He liveth," replied Har, "from all ages, he governeth all realms and
swayeth all things great and small."
"He hath formed," added Jafnhar, "heaven and earth, and the air, and
all things thereunto belonging."
"And what is more," continued Thridi, "he hath made man, and given him
a soul which shall live and never perish though the body shall have
mouldered away, or have been burnt to ashes. And all that are
righteous shall dwell with him in the place called Gimli, or Vingolf;
but the wicked shall go to Hel, and thence to Niflhel, which is below,
in the ninth world."
"And where did this god remain before he made heaven and earth?"
demanded Gangler.
"He was then," replied Har, "with the Hrimthursar."[126]
things?" demanded Gangler.
"Hear," replied Har, "what is said in the Voluspa."
"'Twas time's first dawn,
When nought yet was,
Nor sand nor sea,
Nor cooling wave;
Earth was not there,
Nor heaven above.
Nought save a void
And yawning gulf.
But verdure none.'"
"Many ages before the earth was made," added Jafnhar, "was Niflheim
formed, in the middle of which lies the spring called Hvergelmir, from
which flow twelve rivers, Gjoll being the nearest to the gate of the
abode of death."
"But, first of all," continued Thridi, "there was in the southern
region (sphere) the world called Muspell. It is a world too luminous
and glowing to be entered by those who are not indigenous there.[127]
He who sitteth on its borders (or the land's-end) to guard it is named
Surtur. In his hand he beareth a flaming falchion, and at the end of
the world shall issue forth to combat, and shall vanquish all the
gods, and consume the universe with fire."
races mingled, and nations came into being."
"When the rivers that are called Elivagar had flowed far from their
sources," replied Har, "the venom which they rolled along hardened, as
does dross that runs from a furnace, and became ice. When the rivers
flowed no longer, and the ice stood still, the vapour arising from the
venom gathered over it, and froze to rime, and in this manner were
formed, in Ginnungagap, many layers of congealed vapour, piled one
over the other."
"That part of Ginnungagap," added Jafnhar, "that lies towards the
north was thus filled with heavy masses of gelid vapour and ice,
whilst everywhere within were whirlwinds and fleeting mists. But the
southern part of Ginnungagap was lighted by the sparks and flakes that
flew into it from Muspellheim."
"Thus," continued Thridi, "whilst freezing cold and gathering gloom
proceeded from Niflheim, that part of Ginnungagap looking towards
Muspellheim was filled with glowing radiancy, the intervening space
remaining calm and light as wind-still air. And when the heated blast
met the gelid vapour it melted it into drops, and, by the might of him
who sent the heat, these drops quickened into life, and took a human
semblance. The being thus formed was named Ymir, but the Frost-giants
call him Orgelmir. From him descend the race of the Frost-giants
(Hrimthursar), as it is said in the Voluspa, 'From Vidolf come all
witches; from Vilmeith all wizards; from Svarthofdi all
poison-seethers; and all giants from Ymir.' And the giant Vafthrûdnir,
when Gangrad asked, 'Whence came Orgelmir the first of the sons of
giants?' answered, 'The Elivagar cast out drops of venom that
quickened into a giant. From him spring all our race, and hence are we
so strong and mighty.'"
"How did the race of Ymir spread itself?" asked Gangler; "or dost thou
believe that this giant was a god?"
"We are far from believing him to have been a god," replied Har, "for
he was wicked as are all of his race, whom we call Frost-giants. And
it is said that, when Ymir slept, he fell into a sweat, and from the
pit of his left arm was born a man and a woman, and one of his feet
engendered with the other a son, from whom descend the Frost-giants,
and we therefore call Ymir the old Frost-giant."
"Immediately after the gelid vapours had been resolved into drops,"
replied Kar, "there was formed out of them the cow named Audhumla.
Four streams of milk ran from her teats, and thus fed she Ymir."
"But on what did the cow feed?" questioned Gangler.
"The cow," answered Har, "supported herself by licking the stones that
were covered with salt and hoar frost. The first day that she licked
these stones there sprang from them, towards evening, the hairs of a
man, the second day a head, and on the third an entire man, who was
endowed with beauty, agility and power. He was called Bur, and was the
father of Bor, who took for his wife Besla, the daughter of the giant
Bolthorn. And they had three sons, Odin, Vili, and Ve; and it is our
belief that this Odin, with his brothers, ruleth both heaven and
earth, and that Odin is his true name, and that he is the most mighty
of all the gods."
of good understanding between these two races?"
"Far from it," replied Har; "for the sons of Bor slew the giant Ymir,
and when he fell there ran so much blood from his wounds, that the
whole race of Frost-giants was drowned in it, except a single giant,
who saved himself with his household. He is called by the giants
Bergelmir. He escaped by going on board his bark, and with him went
his wife, and from them are descended the Frost-giants."
asked Gangler.
"To relate this," replied Har, "is no trivial matter. They dragged the
body of Ymir into the middle of Ginnungagap, and of it formed the
earth. From Ymir's blood they made the seas and waters; from his flesh
the land; from his bones the mountains; and his teeth and jaws,
together with some bits of broken bones, served them to make the
stones and pebbles."
"With the blood that ran from his wounds," added Jafnhar, "they made
the vast ocean, in the midst of which they fixed the earth, the ocean
encircling it as a ring, and hardy will he be who attempts to pass
those waters."
"From his skull," continued Thridi, "they formed the heavens, which
they placed over the earth, and set a dwarf at the corner of each of
the four quarters. These dwarfs are called East, West, North, and
South. They afterwards took the wandering sparks and red hot flakes
that had been cast out of Muspellheim, and placed them in the heavens,
both above and below, to give light unto the world, and assigned to
every other errant coruscation a prescribed locality and motion. Hence
it is recorded in ancient lore that from this time were marked out the
days, and nights, and seasons."
"Such are the events that took place ere the earth obtained the form
it now beareth."
"Truly great were the deeds ye tell me of!" exclaimed Gangler; "and
wondrous in all its parts is the work thereby accomplished. But how is
the earth fashioned?"
"It is round without," replied Har, "and encircled by the deep ocean,
the outward shores of which were assigned for a dwelling to the race
of giants. But within, round about the earth, they (the sons of Bor)
raised a bulwark against turbulent giants, employing for this
structure Ymir's eyebrows. To this bulwark they gave the name of
Midgard[128] They afterwards tossed Ymir's brains into the air, and
they became the clouds, for thus we find it recorded.
"Of Ymir's flesh was formed the earth; of his sweat (blood), the seas;
of his bones, the mountains; of his hair the trees; of his skull, the
heavens; but with his eyebrows the blithe gods built Midgard for the
sons of men, whilst from his brains the lowering clouds were
fashioned."
firmament, and mark out the days and seasons, were, indeed, important
labours," said Gangler; "but whence came the men who at present dwell
in the world?"
"One day." replied Har, "as the sons of Bor were walking along the
sea-beach they found two stems of wood, out of which they shaped a man
and a woman. The first (Odin) infused into them life and spirit; the
second (Vili) endowed them with reason and the power of motion; the
third (Ve) gave them speech and features, hearing and vision. The man
they called Ask, and the woman, Embla. From these two descend the
whole human race whose assigned dwelling was within Midgard. Then the
sons of Bor built in the middle of the universe the city called
Asgard, where dwell the gods and their kindred, and from that abode
work out so many wondrous things, both on the earth and in the heavens
above it. There is in that city a place called Hlidskjalf, and when
Odin is seated there on his lofty throne he sees over the whole world,
discerns all the actions of men, and comprehends whatever he
contemplates. His wife is Frigga, the daughter of Fjorgyn, and they
and their offspring form the race that we call Æsir, a race that
dwells in Asgard the old, and the regions around it, and that we know
to be entirely divine. Wherefore Odin may justly be called All-father,
for he is verily the father of all, of gods as well as of men, and to
his power all things owe their existence. Earth is his daughter and
his wife, and with her he had his first-born son, Asa-Thor, who is
endowed with strength and valour, and therefore quelleth he everything
that hath life."
had a daughter called Night (Nott) who, like all her race, was of a
dark and swarthy complexion. She was first wedded to a man called
Naglfari, and had by him a son named Aud, and afterwards to another
man called Annar, by whom she had a daughter called Earth (Jord). She
then espoused Delling, of the Æsir race, and their son was Day, (Dagr)
a child light and beauteous like his father. Then took All-father,
Night, and Day, her son, and gave them two horses and two cars, and
set them up in the heavens that they might drive successively one
after the other, each in twelve hours' time, round the world. Night
rides first on her horse called Hrimfaxi, that every morn, as he ends
his course, bedews the earth with the foam that falls from his bit.
The horse made use of by Day is named Skinfaxi, from whose mane is
shed light over the earth and the heavens."
asked Gangler.
"There was formerly a man," replied Har, "named Mundilfari, who had
two children so lovely and graceful that he called the male, Mani
(moon), and the female, Sol (sun), who espoused the man named Glenur.
But the gods being incensed at Mundilfari's presumption, took his
children and placed them in the heavens, and let Sol drive the horses
that draw the car of the sun, which the gods had made to give light to
the world out of the sparks that flew from Muspellheim. These horses
are called Arvak and Alsvid, and under their withers the gods placed
two skins filled with air to cool and refresh them, or, according to
some ancient traditions, a refrigerant substance called
_isarnkul_.[129] Mani was set to guide the moon in his course, and
regulate his increasing and waning aspect. One day he carried off from
the earth two children, named Bil and Hjuki, as they were returning
from the spring called Byrgir, carrying between them the bucket called
Saegr, on the pole Simul. Vidfinn was the father of these children,
who always follow Mani (the moon), as we may easily observe even from
the earth."
feared that some one was pursuing her for her destruction."
"And well she may," replied Har, "for he that seeks her is not far
behind, and she has no way to escape than to run before him."
"But who is he," asked Gangler, "that causes her this anxiety?"
"There are two wolves," answered Har; "the one called Skoll pursues
the sun, and it is he that she fears, for he shall one day overtake
and devour her; the other, called Hati, the son of Hrodvitnir, runs
before her, and as eagerly pursues the moon that will one day be
caught by him."
"Whence come these wolves?" asked Gangler.
"A hag," replied Har, "dwells in a wood, to the eastward of Midgard,
called Jarnvid, (the Iron Wood,) which is the abode of a race of
witches called Jarnvidjur. This old hag is the mother of many gigantic
sons, who are all of them shaped like wolves, two of whom are the
wolves thou askest about. There is one of that race, who is said to be
the most formidable of all, called Managarm: he will be filled with
the life-blood of men who draw near their end, and will swallow up the
moon, and stain the heavens and the earth with blood. Then shall the
sun grow dim, and the winds howl tumultuously to and fro."
earth to heaven?"
"That is a senseless question," replied Har, with a smile of derision.
"Hast thou not been told that the gods made a bridge from earth to
heaven, and called it Bifrost? Thou must surely have seen it; but,
perhaps, thou callest it the rainbow. It is of three hues, and is
constructed with more art than any other work. But, strong though it
be, it will be broken to pieces when the sons of Muspell, after having
traversed great rivers, shall ride over it."
"Methinks," said Gangler, "the gods could not have been in earnest to
erect a bridge so liable to be broken down, since it is in their power
to make whatever they please."
"The gods," replied Har, "are not to be blamed on that account;
Bifrost is of itself a very good bridge, but there is nothing in
nature that can hope to make resistance when the sons of Muspell sally
forth to the great combat."
Gangler.
"In the beginning," answered Har, "he appointed rulers, and bade them
judge with him the fate of men, and regulate the government of the
celestial city. They met for this purpose in a place called Idavoll,
which is in the centre of the divine abode. Their first work was to
erect a court or hall wherein are twelve seats for themselves, besides
the throne which is occupied by All-father. This hall is the largest
and most magnificent in the universe, being resplendent on all sides,
both within and without, with the finest gold. Its name is Gladsheim.
They also erected another hall for the sanctuary of the goddesses. It
is a very fair structure, and called by men Vingolf. Lastly they built
a smithy, and furnished it with hammers, tongs, and anvils, and with
these made all the other requisite instruments, with which they worked
in metal, stone and wood, and composed so large a quantity of the
metal called gold that they made all their moveables of it. Hence that
age was named the Golden Age. This was the age that lasted until the
arrival of the women out of Jotunheim, who corrupted it."
distributed justice, and bethought them how the dwarfs had been bred
in the mould of the earth, just as worms are in a dead body. It was,
in fact, in Ymir's flesh that the dwarfs were engendered, and began to
move and live. At first they were only maggots, but by the will of the
gods they at length partook both of human shape and understanding,
although they always dwell in rocks and caverns.
"Modsognir and Durin are the principal ones. As it is said in the
Voluspa--
"'Then went the rulers there,
All gods most holy,
To their seats aloft,
And counsel together took,
Who should of dwarfs
The race then fashion,
From the livid bones
And blood of the giant.
Modsognir, chief
Of the dwarfish race,
And Durin too
Were then created.
And like to men
Dwarfs in the earth
Were formed in numbers
As Durin ordered.'"
the gods?"
"It is under the ash Yggdrasill," replied Har, "where the gods
assemble every day in council."
"What is there remarkable in regard to that place?" said Gangler.
"That ash," answered Jafnhar, "is the greatest and best of all trees.
Its branches spread over the whole world, and even reach above heaven.
It has three roots very wide asunder. One of them extends to the Æsir,
another to the Frost-giants in that very place where was formerly
Ginnungagap, and the third stands over Nifelheim, and under this root,
which is constantly gnawed by Nidhogg, is Hvergelmir. But under the
root that stretches out towards the Frost-giants there is Mimir's
well, in which wisdom and wit lie hidden. The owner of this well is
called Mimir. He is full of wisdom, because he drinks the waters of
the well from the horn Gjoll every morning. One day All-father came
and begged a draught of this water, which he obtained, but was obliged
to leave one of his eyes as a pledge for it.
"The third root of the ash is in heaven, and under it is the holy
Urdar-fount. 'Tis here that the gods sit in judgment. Every day they
ride up hither on horseback over Bifrost, which is called the Æsir
Bridge. These are the names of the horses of the Æsir. Sleipnir is the
best of them; he has eight legs, and belongs to Odin. The others are
Gladr, Gyllir, Glær, Skeidbrimir, Silfrintoppr, Synir, Gils,
Falhofnir, Gulltoppr, and Lettfeti. Baldur's horse was burnt with his
master's body. As for Thor, he goes on foot, and is obliged every day
to wade the rivers called Kormt and OErmt, and two others called
Kerlaung.
"Through these shall Thor wade every day, as he fares to the doomstead
under Yggdrasill's ash, else the Æsir Bridge would be in flames, and
boiling hot would become the holy waters."[130] "But tell me," said
Gangler, "does fire burn over Bifrost?"
"That," replied Har, "which thou seest red in the bow, is burning
fire; for the Frost-giants and the Mountain-giants would go up to
heaven by that bridge if it were easy for every one to walk over it.
There are in heaven many goodly homesteads, and none without a
celestial ward. Near the fountain, which is under the ash, stands a
very beauteous dwelling, out of which go three maidens, named Urd,
Verdandi, and Skuld.[131] These maidens fix the lifetime of all men,
and are called Norns. But there are, indeed, many other Norns, for,
when a man is born, there is a Norn to determine his fate. Some are
known to be of heavenly origin, but others belong to the races of the
elves and dwarfs; as it is said--
"'Methinks the Norns were born far asunder, for they are not of the
same race. Some belong to the Æsir, some to the Elves, and some are
Dvalin's daughters."
"But if these Norns dispense the destinies of men," said Gangler,
"they are, methinks, very unequal in their distribution; for some men
are fortunate and wealthy, others acquire neither riches nor honours,
some live to a good old age, while others are cut off in their prime."
"The Norns," replied Har, "who are of a good origin, are good
themselves, and dispense good destinies. But those men to whom
misfortunes happen ought to ascribe them to the evil Norns."
"concerning the ash?"
"What I have further to say respecting it," replied Har, "is, that
there is an eagle perched upon its branches who knows many things:
between his eyes sits the hawk called Vedurfolnir. The squirrel named
Ratatosk runs up and down the ash, and seeks to cause strife between
the eagle and Nidhogg. Four harts run across the branches of the tree,
and bite the buds. They are called Dainn, Divalinn, Duneyr, and
Durathror. But there are so many snakes with Nidhogg in Hvergelmir
that no tongue can recount them."
"It is also said that the Norns who dwell by the Urdar-fount draw
every day water from the spring, and with it and the clay that lies
around the fount sprinkle the ash, in order that its branches may not
rot and wither away. This water is so holy that everything placed in
the spring becomes as white as the film, within an eggshell. As it is
said in the Voluspa--
"'An Ash know I standing,
Named Yggdrasill,
A stately tree sprinkled
With water the purest;
Thence come the dewdrops
That fall in the dales;
Ever blooming, it stands
O'er the Urdar-fountain."'
"The dew that falls thence on the earth men call honey-dew, and it is
the food of the bees. Two fowls are fed in the Urdar-fount; they are
called swans, and from them are descended all the birds of this
species."
"but what other homesteads are to be seen there?"
"There are many other fair homesteads there," replied Har; "one of
them is named Elf-home (Alfheim), wherein dwell the beings called the
Elves of Light; but the Elves of Darkness live under the earth, and
differ from the others still more in their actions than in their
appearance. The Elves of Light are fairer than the sun, but the Elves
of Darkness blacker than pitch. There is also a mansion called
Breidablik, which is not inferior to any other in beauty; and another
named Glitnir, the wall, columns and beams of which are of ruddy gold,
and the roof of silver. There is also the stead called Himinbjorg,
that stands on the borders where Bifrost touches heaven, and the
stately mansion belonging to Odin, called Valaskjalf, which was built
by the gods, and roofed with pure silver, and in which is the throne
called Hlidskjalf. When All-father is seated on this throne, he can
see over the whole world. On the southern edge of heaven is the most
beautiful homestead of all, brighter than the sun itself. It is called
Gimli, and shall stand when both heaven and earth have passed away,
and good and righteous men shall dwell therein for everlasting ages."
"But what will preserve this abode when Surtur's fire consumes heaven
and earth?" asked Gangler.
"We are told," replied Har, "that towards the south there is another
heaven above this called Andlang, and again above this a third heaven
called Vidblain. In this last, we think Gimli must be seated, but we
deem that the Elves of Light abide in it now."
strong that it moves the ocean and fans fire to flame, yet, strong
though it be, no mortal eye can discern it? wonderfully, therefore,
must it be shapen."
"I can tell thee all about it," answered Har; "thou must know that at
the northern extremity of the heavens sits a giant called Hræsvelgur,
clad with eagles' plumes. When he spreads out his wings for flight,
the winds arise from under them."
and the winter cold."
"A wise man would not ask such a question, which every one could
answer," replied Har; "but, if thou hast been so dull as not to have
heard the reason, I will rather forgive thee for once asking a foolish
question than suffer thee to remain any longer in ignorance of what
ought to have been known to thee. The father of Summer is called
Svasuth, who is such a gentle and delicate being that what is mild is
from him called sweet. The father of Winter has two names, Vindloni
and Vindsval. He is the son of Vasad, and, like all his race, has an
icy breath, and is of a grim and gloomy aspect."
are bound to believe in?"
"There are twelve gods," replied Har, "to whom divine honours ought to
be rendered."
"Nor are the goddesses," added Jafnhar, "less divine and mighty."
"The first and eldest of the Æsir," continued Thridi, "is Odin. He
governs all things, and, although the other deities are powerful, they
all serve and obey him as children do their father. Frigga is his
wife. She foresees the destinies of men, but never reveals what is to
come. For thus it is said that Odin himself told Loki, 'Senseless
Loki, why wilt thou pry into futurity, Frigga alone knoweth the
destinies of all, though she telleth them never?'
"Odin is named Alfadir (All-father), because he is the father of all
the gods, and also Valfadir (Choosing Father), because he chooses for
his sons all of those who fall in combat. For their abode he has
prepared Valhalla and Vingolf, where they are called Einherjar (Heroes
or Champions). Odin is also called Hangagud, Haptagud, and Farmagud,
and, besides these, was named in many ways when he went to King
Geirraudr," forty-nine names in all.
"A great many names, indeed!" exclaimed Gangler; "surely that man must
be very wise who knows them all distinctly, and can tell on what
occasions they were given."
"It requires, no doubt," replied Har, "a good memory to recollect
readily all these names, but I will tell thee in a few words what
principally contributed to confer them upon him. It was the great
variety of languages; for the various nations were obliged to
translate his name into their respective tongues, in order that they
might supplicate and worship him. Some of his names, however, have
been owing to adventures that happened to him on his journeys, and
which are related in old stories. Nor canst thou ever pass for a wise
man if thou are not able to give an account of these wonderful
adventures."
gods. What are their functions, and what have they brought to pass?"
"The mightiest of them." replied Har, "is Thor. He is called Asa-Thor
and Auku-Thor, and is the strongest of gods and men. His realm is
named Thrudvang, and his mansion Bilskirnir, in which are five hundred
and forty halls. It is the largest house ever built."
"Thor has a car drawn by two goats called Tanngniost and Tanngrisnir.
From his driving about in this car he is called Auku-Thor
(Charioteer-Thor). He likewise possesses three very precious things.
The first is a mallet called Mjolnir, which both the Frost and
Mountain Giants know to their cost when they see it hurled against
them in the air; and no wonder, for it has split many a skull of their
fathers and kindred. The second rare thing he possesses is called the
belt of strength or prowess (Megingjardir). When he girds it about
him his divine might is doubly augmented; the third, also very
precious, being his iron gauntlets, which he is obliged to put on
whenever he would lay hold of the handle of his mallet. There is no
one so wise as to be able to relate all Thor's marvellous exploits,
yet I could tell thee so many myself that hours would be whiled away
ere all that I know had been recounted."
Æsir."
"The second son of Odin," replied Har, "is Baldur, and it may be truly
said of him that he is the best, and that all mankind are loud in his
praise. So fair and dazzling is he in form and features, that rays of
light seem to issue from him; and thou mayst have some idea of the
beauty of his hair, when I tell thee that the whitest of all plants is
called Baldur's brow. Baldur is the mildest, the wisest, and the most
eloquent of all the Æsir, yet such is his nature that the judgment he
has pronounced can never be altered. He dwells in the heavenly mansion
called Breidablik, in which nothing unclean can enter."
heavenly region called Noatun. He rules over the winds, and checks the
fury of the sea and of fire, and is therefore invoked by sea-farers
and fishermen. He is so wealthy that he can give possessions and
treasures to those who call on him for them. Yet Njord is not of the
lineage of the Æsir, for he was born and bred in Vanaheim. But the
Vanir gave him as hostage to the Æsir, receiving from them in his
stead Hoenir. By this means was peace re-established between the Æsir
and Vanir. Njord took to wife Skadi, the daughter of the giant
Thjassi. She preferred dwelling in the abode formerly belonging to her
father, which is situated among rocky mountains, in the region called
Thrymheim, but Njord loved to reside near the sea. They at last agreed
that they should pass together nine nights in Thrymheim, and then
three in Noatun. One day, when Njord came back from the mountains to
Noatun, he thus sang--
"'Of mountains I'm weary,
Not long was I there,
Not more than nine nights;
But the howl of the wolf
Methought sounded ill
To the song of the swan-bird.'
"To which Skadi sang in reply--
"'Ne'er can I sleep
In my couch on the strand,
For the screams of the sea-fowl,
The mew as he comes
Every morn from the main
Is sure to awake me.'
"Skadi then returned to the rocky mountains, and abode in Thrymheim.
There, fastening on her snow-skates and taking her bow, she passes her
time in the chase of savage beasts, and is called the Ondur goddess,
or Ondurdis. As it is said--
"'Thrymheim's the land
Where Thjassi abode
That mightiest of giants.
But snow-skating Skadi
Now dwells there, I trow,
In her father's old mansion.'"
a son named Frey, and a daughter called Freyja, both of them beauteous
and mighty. Frey is one of the most celebrated of the gods. He
presides over rain and sunshine, and all the fruits of the earth, and
should be invoked in order to obtain good harvests, and also for
peace. He, moreover, dispenses wealth among men. Freyja is the most
propitious of the goddesses; her abode in heaven is called Folkvang.
To whatever field of battle she rides, she asserts her right to one
half of the slain, the other half belonging to Odin. As it is said--
"'Folkvang 'tis called
Where Freyja hath right
To dispose of the hall seats
Every day of the slain,
She chooseth the half,
And half leaves to Odin.'
"Her mansion, called Sessrumnir, is large and magnificent; thence she
sallies forth in a car drawn by two cats. She lends a very favourable
ear to those who sue to her for assistance. It is from her name that
women of birth and fortune are called in our language Freyjor. She is
very fond of love ditties, and all lovers would do well to invoke
her."
and I am not at all surprised that ye are able to perform so many
great achievements, since ye are so well acquainted with the
attributes and functions of each god, and know what is befitting to
ask from each, in order to succeed. But are there any more of them
besides those you have already mentioned?"
"Ay," answered Har, "there is Tyr, who is the most daring and intrepid
of all the gods. 'Tis he who dispenses valour in war, hence warriors
do well to invoke him. It has become proverbial to say of a man who
surpasses all others in valour that he is _Tyr-strong_, or valiant as
Tyr. A man noted for his wisdom is also said to be 'wise as Tyr.' Let
me give thee a proof of his intrepidity. When the Æsir were trying to
persuade the wolf, Fenrir, to let himself be bound up with the chain,
Gleipnir, he, fearing that they would never afterwards unloose him,
only consented on the condition that while they were chaining him he
should keep Tyr's right hand between his jaws. Tyr did not hesitate to
put his hand in the monster's mouth, but when Fenrir perceived that
the Æsir had no intention to unchain him, he bit the hand off at that
point, which has ever since been called the wolf's joint. From that
time Tyr has had but one hand. He is not regarded as a peacemaker
among men."
celebrated for his wisdom, and more especially for his eloquence and
correct forms of speech. He is not only eminently skilled in poetry,
but the art itself is called from his name _Bragr_, which epithet is
also applied to denote a distinguished poet or poetess. His wife is
named Iduna. She keeps in a box the apples which the gods, when they
feel old age approaching, have only to taste of to become young again.
It is in this manner that they will be kept in renovated youth until
Ragnarok."
"Methinks," interrupted Gangler, "the gods have committed a great
treasure to the guardianship and good faith of Iduna."
"And hence it happened," replied Har, smiling, "that they once ran the
greatest risk imaginable, as I shall have occasion to tell thee when
thou hast heard the names of the other deities.
son of nine virgins, who were sisters, and is a very sacred and
powerful deity. He also bears the appellation of the Gold-toothed, on
account of his teeth being of pure gold, and also that of
Hallinskithi. His horse is called Gulltopp, and he dwells in
Himinbjorg at the end of Bifrost. He is the warder of the gods, and is
therefore placed on the borders of heaven, to prevent the giants from
forcing their way over the bridge. He requires less sleep than a bird,
and sees by night, as well as by day, a hundred miles around him. So
acute is his ear that no sound escapes him, for he can even hear the
grass growing on the earth, and the wool on a sheep's back. He has a
horn called the Gjallar-horn, which is heard throughout the universe.
His sword is called Hofud (Head).
blind, but extremely strong. Both gods and men would be very glad if
they never had occasion to pronounce his name, for they will long have
cause to remember the deed perpetrated by his hand.[132]
shoes. He is almost as strong as Thor himself, and the gods place
great reliance on him in all critical conjunctures.
war, and an excellent archer.
Thor. He is so well skilled in the use of the bow, and can go so fast
on his snow-skates, that in these arts no one can contend with him. He
is also very handsome in his person, and possesses every quality of a
warrior, wherefore it is befitting to invoke him in single combats.
and Nanna, the daughter of Nef. He possesses the heavenly mansion
called Glitnir, and all disputants at law who bring their cases before
him go away perfectly reconciled.
"His tribunal is the best that is to be found among gods or men.
of the Æsir, whom some call the calumniator of the gods, the contriver
of all fraud and mischief, and the disgrace of gods and men. His name
is Loki or Loptur. He is the son of the giant Farbauti. His mother is
Laufey or Nal; his brothers are Byleist and Helblindi. Loki is
handsome and well made, but of a very fickle mood, and most evil
disposition. He surpasses all beings in those arts called Cunning and
Perfidy. Many a time has he exposed the gods to very great perils, and
often extricated them again by his artifices. His wife is called
Siguna, and their son Nari.
Angurbodi, a giantess of Jotunheim. The first is the wolf Fenrir; the
second Jormungand, the Midgard serpent; the third Hela (Death). The
gods were not long ignorant that these monsters continued to be bred
up in Jotunheim, and, having had recourse to divination, became aware
of all the evils they would have to suffer from them; their being
sprung from such a mother was a bad presage, and from such a sire was
still worse. All-father therefore deemed it advisable to send one of
the gods to bring them to him. When they came he threw the serpent
into that deep ocean by which the earth is engirdled. But the monster
has grown to such an enormous size that, holding his tail in his
mouth, he encircles the whole earth. Hela he cast into Nifelheim, and
gave her power over nine worlds (regions), into which she distributes
those who are sent to her, that is to say, all who die through
sickness or old age. Here she possesses a habitation protected by
exceedingly high walls and strongly barred gates. Her hall is called
Elvidnir; Hunger is her table; Starvation, her knife; Delay, her man;
Slowness, her maid; Precipice, her threshold; Care, her bed; and
Burning Anguish forms the hangings of her apartments. The one half of
her body is livid, the other half the colour of human flesh. She may
therefore easily be recognized; the more so, as she has a dreadfully
stern and grim countenance.
"The wolf Fenrir was bred up among the gods; but Tyr alone had the
daring to go and feed him. Nevertheless, when the gods perceived that
he every day increased prodigiously in size, and that the oracles
warned them that he would one day become fatal to them, they
determined to make a very strong iron fetter for him, which they
called Læding. Taking this fetter to the wolf, they bade him try his
strength on it. Fenrir, perceiving that the enterprise would not be
very difficult for him, let them do what they pleased, and then, by
great muscular exertion, burst the chain and set himself at liberty.
The gods, having seen this, made another fetter, half as strong again
as the former, which they called Dromi, and prevailed on the wolf to
put it on, assuring him that, by breaking this, he would give an
undeniable proof of his vigour.
"The wolf saw well enough that it would not be so easy to break this
fetter, but finding at the same time that his strength had increased
since he broke Læding, and thinking that he could never become famous
without running some risk, voluntarily submitted to be chained. When
the gods told him that they had finished their task, Fenrir shook
himself violently, stretched his limbs, rolled on the ground, and at
last burst his chains, which flew in pieces all around him. He then
freed himself from Dromi, which gave rise to the proverb, 'to get
loose out of Læding, or to dash out of Dromi,' when anything is to be
accomplished by strong efforts.
"After this, the gods despaired of ever being able to bind the wolf;
wherefore All-father sent Skirnir, the messenger of Frey, into the
country of the Dark Elves (Svartalfaheim) to engage certain dwarfs to
make the fetter called Gleipnir. It was fashioned out of six things;
to wit, the noise made by the footfall of a cat; the beards of women;
the roots of stones; the sinews of bears; the breath of fish; and the
spittle of birds. Though thou mayest not have heard of these things
before, thou mayest easily convince thyself that we have not been
telling thee lies. Thou must have seen that women have no beards, that
cats make no noise when they run, and that there are no roots under
stones. Now I know what has been told thee to be equally true,
although there may be some things thou art not able to furnish a proof
of."
"I believe what thou hast told me to be true," replied Gangler, "for
what thou hast adduced in corroboration of thy statement is
conceivable. But how was the fetter smithied?"
"This can I tell thee," replied Har, "that the fetter was as smooth
and soft as a silken string, and yet, as thou wilt presently hear, of
very great strength. When it was brought to the gods, they were
profuse in their thanks to the messenger for the trouble he had given
himself; and taking the wolf with them to the island called Lyngvi, in
the Lake Amsvartnir, they showed him the cord, and expressed their
wish that he would try to break it, assuring him at the same time that
it was somewhat stronger than its thinness would warrant a person in
supposing it to be. They took it themselves, one after another, in
their hands, and after attempting in vain to break it, said, 'Thou
alone, Fenrir, art able to accomplish such a feat.'
"'Methinks,' replied the wolf, 'that I shall acquire no fame in
breaking such a slender cord; but if any artifice has been employed in
making it, slender though it seems, it shall never come on my feet.'
"The gods assured him that he would easily break a limber silken cord,
since he had already burst asunder iron fetters of the most solid
construction. 'But if thou shouldst not succeed in breaking it,' they
added, 'thou wilt show that thou art too weak to cause the gods any
fear, and we will not hesitate to set thee at liberty without delay.'
"'I fear me much,' replied he wolf, 'that if ye once bind me so fast
that I shall be unable to free myself by my own efforts, ye will be in
no haste to unloose me. Loath am I, therefore, to have this cord wound
round me; but in order that ye may not doubt my courage, I will
consent, provided one of you put his hand into my mouth as a pledge
that ye intend me no deceit.'
"The gods wistfully looked at each other, and found that they had
only the choice of two evils, until Tyr stepped forward and intrepidly
put his right hand between the monster's jaws. Hereupon the gods,
having tied up the wolf, he forcibly stretched himself as he had
formerly done, and used all his might to disengage himself, but the
more efforts he made the tighter became the cord, until all the gods,
except Tyr, who lost his hand, burst into laughter at the sight.
"When the gods saw that the wolf was effectually bound, they took the
chain called Gelgja, which was fixed to the fetter, and drew it
through the middle of a large rock named Gjoll, which they sank very
deep into the earth; afterwards, to make it still more secure, they
fastened the end of the cord to a massive stone called Thviti, which
they sank still deeper. The wolf made in vain the most violent efforts
to break loose, and opening his tremendous jaws endeavoured to bite
them. The gods seeing this, thrust a sword into his mouth, which
pierced his under-jaw to the hilt, so that the point touched the
palate. He then began to howl horribly, and since that time the foam
flows continually from his mouth in such abundance that it forms the
river called Von. There will he remain until Ragnarok."
"Verily," said Gangler, "an evil progeny is that of Loki, yet most
mighty and powerful; but since the gods have so much to fear from the
wolf, why did they not slay him?"
"The gods have so much respect for the sanctity of their
peace-steads," replied Har, "that they would not stain them with the
blood of the wolf, although prophecy had intimated to them that he
must one day become the bane of Odin."
"The first," replied Har, "is Frigga, who has a magnificent mansion
called Fensalir. The second is Saga, who dwells at Sokkvabekk, a very
large and stately abode. The third is Eir, the best of all in the
healing art. The fourth, named Gefjon, is a maid, and all those who
die maids become her hand-maidens. The fifth is Fulla, who is also a
maid, and goes about with her hair flowing over her shoulders, and her
head adorned with a gold ribbon. She is entrusted with the toilette
and slippers of Frigga, and admitted into the most important secrets
of that goddess. Freyja is ranked next to Frigga: she is wedded to a
person called Odur, and their daughter, named Hnossa, is so very
handsome that whatever is beautiful and precious is called by her name
(_hnosir_.) But Odur left his wife in order to travel into very remote
countries. Since that time Freyja continually weeps, and her tears are
drops of pure gold. She has a great variety of names, for having gone
over many countries in search of her husband, each people gave her a
different name. She is thus called Mardoll, Horn, Gefn, and Syr, and
also Vanadis. She possesses the necklace Brising. The seventh goddess
is Sjofna, who delights in turning men's hearts and thoughts to love;
hence a wooer is called, from her name, _Sjafni_. The eighth, called
Lofna, is so mild and gracious to those who invoke her, that by a
peculiar privilege which either All-Father himself or Frigga has given
her, she can remove every obstacle that may prevent the union of
lovers sincerely attached to each other. Hence her name is applied to
denote love, and whatever is beloved by men. Vora, the ninth goddess,
listens to the oaths that men take, and particularly to the troth
plighted between man and woman, and punishes those who keep not their
promises. She is wise and prudent, and so penetrating that nothing
remains hidden from her. Syn, the tenth, keeps the door in the hall,
and shuts it against those who ought not to enter. She presides at
trials when any thing is to be denied on oath, whence the proverb,
'Syn (negation) is set against it,' when ought is denied. Hlina, the
eleventh, has the care of those whom Frigga intends to deliver from
peril. Snotra, the twelfth, is wise and courteous, and men and women
who possess these qualities have her name applied to them. Gna, the
thirteenth, is the messenger that Frigga sends into the various worlds
on her errands. She has a horse that can run through air and water,
called Hofvarpnir. Once, as she drove out, certain Vanir saw her car
in the air, when one of them exclaimed,
"'What flieth there?
What goeth there?
In the air aloft what glideth?'
"She answered,
"'I fly not though I go,
And glide through the air
On Hofvarpnir,
Whose sire's Hamskerpir,
And dam Gardrofa.'
"Sol and Bil are also reckoned among the goddesses, but their nature
has already been explained to thee.
duty it is to serve in Valhalla; to bear in the drink and take care of
the drinking-horns and whatever belongs to the table. They are named
in Grimnismal, and are called Valkyrjor. Odin sends them to every
field of battle, to make choice of those who are to be slain, and to
sway the victory. Gudur, Rota, and the youngest of the Norns, Skuld,
also ride forth to choose the slain and turn the combat. Jord (earth),
the mother of Thor, and Rinda, the mother of Vali, are also reckoned
amongst the goddesses."
Aurboda, of the race of the Mountain-giants. Their daughter is Gerda,
who is the most beautiful of all women. One day Frey having placed
himself in Hlidskjalf, to take a view of the whole universe,
perceived, as he looked towards the north, a large and stately mansion
which a woman was going to enter, and as she lifted up the latch of
the door so great a radiancy was thrown from her hand that the air and
waters, and all worlds were illuminated by it. At this sight, Frey, as
a just punishment for his audacity in mounting on that sacred throne,
was struck with sudden sadness, insomuch so, that on his return home
he could neither speak, nor sleep, nor drink, nor did any one dare to
inquire the cause of his affliction; but Njord, at last, sent for
Skirnir, the messenger of Frey, and charged him to demand of his
master why he thus refused to speak to any one. Skirnir promised to do
this, though with great reluctance, fearing that all he had to expect
was a severe reprimand. He, however, went to Frey, and asked him
boldly why he was so sad and silent. Frey answered, that he had seen a
maiden of such surpassing beauty that if he could not possess her he
should not live much longer, and that this was what rendered him so
melancholy. 'Go, therefore,' he added, 'and ask her hand for me, and
bring her here whether her father be willing or not, and I will amply
reward thee.' Skirnir undertook to perform the task, provided he might
be previously put in possession of Frey's sword, which was of such
excellent quality that it would of itself strew a field with carnage
whenever the owner ordered it. Frey, impatient of delay, immediately
made him a present of the sword, and Skirnir set out on his journey
and obtained the maiden's promise, that within nine nights she would
come to a place called Barey, and there wed Frey. Skirnir having
reported the success of his message, Frey exclaimed,
"'Long is one night,
Long are two nights,
But how shall I hold out three?
Shorter hath seemed
A month to me oft
Than of this longing-time the half.'
"Frey having thus given away his sword, found himself without arms
when he fought with Beli, and hence it was that he slew him with a
stag's antlers."
"But it seems very astonishing," interrupted Gangler, "that such a
brave hero as Frey should give away his sword without keeping another
equally good for himself. He must have been in a very bad plight when
he encountered Beli, and methinks must have mightily repented him of
the gift."
"That combat," replied Har, "was a trifling affair. Frey could have
killed Beli with a blow of his fist had he felt inclined: but the time
will come when the sons of Muspell shall issue forth to the fight, and
then, indeed, will Frey truly regret having parted with his falchion."
have fallen in fight since the beginning of the world are gone to
Odin, in Valhalla, what has he to give them to eat, for methinks there
must be a great crowd there?"
"What thou sayest is quite true," replied Har, "the crowd there is
indeed great, but great though it be, it will still increase, and will
be thought too little when the wolf cometh. But however great the band
of men in Valhalla may be, the flesh of the boar Sæhrimnir will more
than suffice for their sustenance. For although this boar is sodden
every morning he becomes whole again every night. But there are few,
methinks, who are wise enough to give thee, in this respect, a
satisfactory answer to thy question. The cook is called Andhrimnir,
and the kettle Eldhrimnir. As it is said,--'Andhrimnir cooks in
Eldhrimnir, Sæhrimnir.' 'Tis the best of flesh, though few know how
much is required for the Einherjar."
"But has Odin," said Gangler, "the same food as the heroes?"
"Odin,' replied Har, 'gives the meat that is set before him to two
wolves, called Geri and Freki, for he himself stands in no need of
food. Wine is for him both meat and drink.
"Two ravens sit on Odin's shoulders and whisper in his ear the tidings
and events they have heard and witnessed. They are called Hugin and
Munin.[133] He sends them out at dawn of day to fly over the whole
world, and they return at eve towards meal time. Hence it is that Odin
knows so many things, and is called the Raven's God. As it is said,--
'Hugin and Munin
Each dawn take their flight
Earth's fields over.
I fear me for Hugin,
Lest he come not back,
But much more for Munin.'"
quantity to correspond to their plentiful supply of meat: do they only
drink water?"
"A very silly question is that," replied Har; "dost thou imagine that
All-Father would invite kings and jarls and other great men and give
them nothing to drink but water! In that case, methinks, many of those
who had endured the greatest hardships, and received deadly wounds in
order to obtain access to Valhalla, would find that they had paid too
great a price for their water drink, and would indeed have reason to
complain were they there to meet with no better entertainment. But
thou wilt see that the case is quite otherwise. For the she-goat,
named Heidrun, stands above Valhalla, and feeds on the leaves of a
very famous tree called Lærath, and from her teats flows mead in such
great abundance that every day a stoop, large enough to hold more than
would suffice for all the heroes, is filled with it."
"Verily," said Gangler, "a mighty useful goat is this, and methinks
the tree she feeds on must have very singular virtues."
"Still more wonderful," replied Har, "is what is told of the stag
Eikthyrnir. This stag also stands over Valhalla and feeds upon the
leaves of the same tree, and whilst he is feeding so many drops fall
from his antlers down into Hvergelmir that they furnish sufficient
water for the rivers that issuing thence flow through the celestial
abodes."
Gangler, "and Valhalla must needs be an immense building, but methinks
there must often be a great press at the door among such a number of
people constantly thronging in and out?"
"Why dost thou not ask," replied Har, "how many doors there are, and
what are their dimensions; then wouldst thou be able to judge whether
there is any difficulty in going in and out. Know, then, that there is
no lack of either seats or doors. As it is said in Grimnismal:--
"'Five hundred doors
And forty more
Methinks are in Valhalla.
Eight hundred heroes through each door
Shall issue forth
Against the wolf to combat.'"
methinks Odin must be a great chieftain to command such a numerous
host. But how do the heroes pass their time when they are not
drinking?"
"Every day," replied Har, "as soon as they have dressed themselves
they ride out into the court (or field), and there fight until they
cut each other to pieces. This is their pastime, but when meal-time
approaches they remount their steeds and return to drink in Valhalla.
As it is said:--
"'The Einherjar all
On Odin's plain
Hew daily each other,
While chosen the slain are.
From the fray they then ride,
And drink ale with the Æsir.'
"Thou hast thus reason to say that Odin is great and mighty, for there
are many proofs of this. As it is said in the very words of the
Æsir:--
"'The ash Yggdrasill
Is the first of trees,
As Skidbladnir of ships,
Odin of Æsir,
Sleipnir of steeds,
Bifrost of bridges,
Bragi of bards,
Habrok of hawks,
And Garm of hounds is.'
whom does he belong, and what is there to say respecting him?"
"Thou seemest to know nothing either about Sleipnir or his origin,"
replied Har, "but thou wilt no doubt find what thou wilt hear worthy
of thy notice. Once on a time when the gods were constructing their
abodes, and had already finished Midgard and Valhalla, a certain
artificer came and offered to build them, in the space of three half
years, a residence so well fortified that they should be perfectly
safe from the incursion of the Frost-giants, and the giants of the
mountains, even although they should have penetrated within Midgard.
But he demanded for his reward the goddess Freyja, together with the
sun and moon. After long deliberation the Æsir agreed to his terms,
provided he would finish the whole work himself without any one's
assistance, and all within the space of one winter, but if anything
remained unfinished on the first day of summer, he should forfeit the
recompense agreed on. On being told these terms, the artificer
stipulated that he should be allowed the use of his horse, called
Svadilfari, and this, by the advice of Loki, was granted to him. He
accordingly set to work on the first day of winter, and during the
night let his horse draw stone for the building. The enormous size of
the stones struck the Æsir with astonishment, and they saw clearly
that the horse did one half more of the toilsome work than his master.
Their bargain, however, had been concluded in the presence of
witnesses, and confirmed by solemn oaths, for without these
precautions a giant would not have thought himself safe among the
Æsir, especially when Thor returned from an expedition he had then
undertaken towards the east against evil demons.
"As the winter drew to a close the building was far advanced, and the
bulwarks were sufficiently high and massive to render this residence
impregnable. In short, when it wanted but three days to summer the
only part that remained to be finished was the gateway. Then sat the
gods on their seats of justice and entered into consultation,
inquiring of one another who among them could have advised to give
Freyja away to Jotunheim, or to plunge the heavens in darkness by
permitting the giant to carry away the sun and moon. They all agreed
that no one but Loki, the son of Laufey, and the author of so many
evil deeds, could have given such bad counsel, and that he should be
put to a cruel death if he did not contrive some way or other to
prevent the artificer from completing his task and obtaining the
stipulated recompense. They immediately proceeded to lay hands on
Loki, who, in his fright, promised upon oath that let it cost him what
it would, he would so manage matters that the man should lose his
reward. That very night, when the artificer went with Svadilfari for
building stone, a mare suddenly ran out of a forest and began to
neigh. The horse being thus excited, broke loose and ran after the
mare into the forest, which obliged the man also to run after his
horse, and thus between one and the other the whole night was lost, so
that at dawn the work had not made the usual progress. The man seeing
that he had no other means of completing his task, resumed his own
gigantic stature, and the gods now clearly perceived that it was in
reality a Mountain-giant who had come amongst them. No longer
regarding their oaths, they, therefore, called on Thor, who
immediately ran to their assistance, and lifting up his mallet Mjolnir
paid the workman his wages, not with the sun and moon, and not even by
sending him back to Jotunheim, for with the first blow he shattered
the giant's skull to pieces, and hurled him headlong into Nifelhel.
But Loki had run such a race with Svadilfari that shortly after he
bore a grey foal with eight legs. This is the horse Sleipnir, which
excels all horses ever possessed by gods or men."
which thou toldst me was the best of ships? Is there no other ship as
good or as large?"
"Skidbladnir," replied Har, "is without doubt the best and most
artfully constructed of any, but the ship Nagffar is of larger size.
They were dwarfs, the sons of Ivaldi, who built Skidbladnir, and made
a present of her to Frey. She is so large that all the Æsir with their
weapons and war stores find room on board her. As soon as the sails
are set a favourable breeze arises and carries her to her place of
destination, and she is made of so many pieces, and with so much
skill, that when she is not wanted for a voyage Frey may fold her
together like a piece of cloth, and put her in his pocket."
"A good ship truly, is Skidbladnir," said Gangler, "and many cunning
contrivances and spells must, no doubt, have been used in her
construction."
Thor in his expeditions to be overcome either by spells or by
downright force?"
"Few can take upon them to affirm this," replied Har, "and yet it has
often fared hard enough with him; but had he in reality been worsted
in any rencounter there would be no need to make mention of it, since
all are bound to believe that nothing can resist his power."
"It would, therefore, appear," said Gangler, "that I have asked of you
things that none of you are able to tell me of."
"There are, indeed, some such rumours current among us," answered
Jafnhar, "but they are hardly credible; however, there is one sitting
here can impart them to thee, and thou shouldst the rather believe
him, for never having yet uttered an untruth, he will not now begin to
deceive thee with false stories."
"Here then will I stand," said Gangler, "and listen to what ye have to
say, but if ye cannot answer my question satisfactorily I shall look
upon you as vanquished."
Then spake Thridi and said, "We can easily conceive that thou art
desirous of knowing these tidings, but it behooves thee to guard a
becoming silence respecting them. The story I have to relate is
this:--
and accompanied by Loki, on a journey. Night coming on, they put up at
a peasant's cottage, where Thor killed his goats, and after flaying
them, put them in the kettle. When the flesh was sodden, he sat down
with his fellow-traveller to supper, and invited the peasant and his
family to partake of his repast. The peasant's son was named Thjalfi,
and his daughter Roska. Thor bade them throw all the bones into the
goats' skins which were spread out near the fire-place, but young
Thjalfi broke one of the shank bones with his knife to come to the
marrow. Thor having passed the night in the cottage, rose at the dawn
of day, and when he was dressed took his mallet Mjolnir, and lifting
it up, consecrated the goats' skins, which he had no sooner done than
the two goats re-assumed their wonted form, only that one of them now
limped on one of its hind legs. Thor perceiving this, said that the
peasant, or one of his family, had handled the shank bone of this goat
too roughly, for he saw clearly that it was broken. It may readily be
imagined how frightened the peasant was when he saw Thor knit his
brows, and grasp the handle of his mallet with such force that the
joints of his fingers became white from the exertion. Fearing to be
struck down by the very looks of the god, the peasant and his family
made joint suit for pardon, offering whatever they possessed as an
atonement for the offence committed. Thor, seeing their fear, desisted
from his wrath, and became more placable, and finally contented
himself by requiring the peasant's children, Thjalfi and Roska, who
became his bond-servants, and have followed him ever since.
'Leaving his goats with the peasant, Thor proceeded eastward on the
road to Jotunheim, until he came to the shores of a vast and deep sea,
which having passed over he penetrated into a strange country along
with his companions, Loki, Thjalfi, and Roska. They had not gone far
before they saw before them an immense forest, through which they
wandered all day. Thjalfi was of all men the swiftest of foot. He bore
Thor's wallet, but the forest was a bad place for finding anything
eatable to stow in it. When it became dark, they searched on all sides
for a place where they might pass the night, and at last came to a
very large hall with an entrance that took up the whole breadth of one
of the ends of the building. Here they chose them a place to sleep in;
but towards midnight were alarmed by an earthquake which shook the
whole edifice. Thor, rising up, called on his companions to seek with
him a place of safety. On the right they found an adjoining chamber,
into which they entered, but while the others, trembling with fear,
crept into the furthest corner of this retreat, Thor remained at the
doorway with his mallet in his hand, prepared to defend himself,
whatever might happen. A terrible groaning was heard during the night,
and at dawn of day, Thor went out and observed lying near him a man of
enormous bulk, who slept and snored pretty loudly. Thor could now
account for the noise they had heard over night, and girding on his
Belt of Prowess, increased that divine strength which he now stood in
need of. The giant awakening, rose up, and it is said that for once in
his life Thor was afraid to make use of his mallet, and contented
himself by simply asking the giant his name.
"'My name is Skrymir, said the other, 'but I need not ask thy name,
for I know thou art the God Thor. But what hast thou done with my
glove?' And stretching out his hand Skrymir picked up his glove, which
Thor then perceived was what they had taken over night for a hall, the
chamber where they had sought refuge being the thumb. Skrymir then
asked whether they would have his fellowship, and Thor consenting, the
giant opened his wallet and began to eat his breakfast. Thor and his
companions having also taken their morning repast, though in another
place, Skrymir proposed that they should lay their provisions
together, which Thor also assented to. The giant then put all the meat
into one wallet, which he slung on his back and went before them,
taking tremendous strides, the whole day, and at dusk sought out for
them a place where they might pass the night under a large oak tree.
Skrymir then told them that he would lie down to sleep. 'But take ye
the wallet,' he added, 'and prepare your supper.'
"Skrymir soon fell asleep, and began to snore strongly, but incredible
though it may appear, it must nevertheless be told, that when Thor
came to open the wallet he could not untie a single knot, nor render a
single string looser than it was before. Seeing that his labour was in
vain, Thor became wroth, and grasping his mallet with both hands while
he advanced a step forward, launched it at the giant's head. Skrymir,
awakening, merely asked whether a leaf had not fallen on his head, and
whether they had supped and were ready to go to sleep. Thor answered
that they were just going to sleep, and so saying, went and laid
himself down under another oak tree. But sleep came not that night to
Thor, and when he remarked that Skrymir snored again so loud that the
forest re-echoed with the noise, he arose, and grasping his mallet,
launched it with such force that it sunk into the giant's skull up to
the handle. Skrymir awakening, cried out--
"'What's the matter? did an acorn fall on my head? How fares it with
thee, Thor?'
"But Thor went away hastily, saying that he had just then awoke, and
that as it was only midnight there was still time for sleep. He
however resolved that if he had an opportunity of striking a third
blow, it should settle all matters between them. A little before
daybreak he perceived that Skrymir was again fast asleep, and again
grasping his mallet, dashed it with such violence that it forced its
way into the giant's cheek up to the handle. But Skrymir sat up, and
stroking his cheek, said--
"'Are there any birds perched on this tree? Methought when I awoke
some moss from the branches fell on my head. What! Art thou awake,
Thor? Methinks it is time for us to get up and dress ourselves; but
you have not now a long way before you to the city called Utgard. I
have heard you whispering to one another that I am not a man of small
dimensions; but if you come into Utgard you will see there many men
much taller than myself. Wherefore I advise you, when you come there,
not to make too much of yourselves, for the followers of Utgard-Loki
will not brook the boasting of such mannikins as ye are. The best
thing you could do would probably be to turn back again, but if you
persist in going on, take the road that leads eastward, for mine now
lies northward to those rocks which you may see in the distance.'
"Hereupon, he threw his wallet over his shoulders and turned away from
them, into the forest, and I could never hear that Thor wished to meet
with him a second time.
noon descried a city standing in the middle of a plain. It was so
lofty that they were obliged to bend their necks quite back on their
shoulders ere they could see to the top of it. On arriving at the
walls they found the gateway closed with a gate of bars strongly
locked and bolted. Thor, after trying in vain to open it, crept with
his companions through the bars, and thus succeeded in gaining
admission into the city. Seeing a large palace before them, with the
door wide open, they went in and found a number of men of prodigious
stature sitting on benches in the hall. Going further, they came
before the king, Utgard-Loki, whom they saluted with great respect.
Their salutations were however returned by a contemptuous look from
the king, who, after regarding them for some time, said with a
scornful smile--
"'It is tedious to ask for tidings of a long journey, yet if I do not
mistake me, that stripling there must be Aku-Thor. Perhaps,' he added,
addressing himself to Thor, 'thou mayst be taller than thou appearest
to be. But what are the feats that thou and thy fellows deem
yourselves skilled in, for no one is permitted to remain here who does
not, in some feat or other, excel all other men.'
"'The feat I know,' replied Loki, 'is to eat quicker than any one
else, and in this I am ready to give a proof against any one here who
may choose to compete with me.'
"'That will indeed be a feat,' said Utgard-Loki, 'if thou performest
what thou promisest, and it shall be tried forthwith.'
"He then ordered one of his men, who was sitting at the further end of
the bench, and whose name was Logi,[134] to come forward and try his
skill with Loki. A trough filled with flesh meat having been set on
the hall floor, Loki placed himself at one end, and Logi at the other,
and each of them, began to eat as fast as he could, until they met in
the middle of the trough. But it was found that Loki had only eaten
the flesh, whereas his adversary had devoured both flesh and bone, and
the trough to boot. All the company therefore adjudged that Loki was
vanquished.
"Utgard-Loki then asked what feat the young man who accompanied Thor
could perform. Thjalfi answered that he would run a race with any one
who might be matched against him. The king observed that skill in
running was something to boast of, but that if the youth would win the
match he must display great agility. He then arose and went with all
who were present to a plain where there was a good ground for running
on, and calling a young man named Hugi,[135] bade him run a match with
Thjalfi. In the first course Hugi so much outstripped his competitor
that he turned back and met him not far from the starting-place.
"'Thou must ply thy legs better, Thjalfi,' said Utgard-Loki, 'if thou
wilt win the match, though I must needs say that there never came a
man here swifter of foot than thou art.'
"In the second course, Thjalfi was a full bow-shot from the goal when
Hugi arrived at it.
"'Most bravely dost thou run, Thjalfi,' said Utgard-Loki, 'though thou
wilt not, methinks, win the match. But the third, course must decide.'
"They accordingly ran a third time, but Hugi had already reached the
goal before Thjalfi had got half way. All who were present then cried
out that there had been a sufficient trial of skill in this kind of
exercise.
give proofs of that dexterity for which he was so famous. Thor
replied, that he would begin a drinking match with any one.
Utgard-Loki consented, and entering the palace, bade his cupbearer
bring the large horn which his followers were obliged to drink out of
when they had trespassed in any way against established usage. The
cupbearer having presented it to Thor, Utgard-Loki said--
"'Whoever is a good drinker will empty that horn at a single draught,
though some men make two of it, but the most puny drinker of all can
do it at three.'
"Thor looked at the horn, which seemed of no extraordinary size,
though somewhat long; however, as he was very thirsty, he set it to
his lips, and without drawing breath pulled as long and as deeply as
he could, that he might not be obliged to make a second draught of it;
but when he set the horn down and looked in, he could scarcely
perceive that the liquor was diminished.
"''Tis well drunken,' exclaimed Utgard-Loki, 'though nothing much to
boast of; and I would not have believed had it been told me that
Asa-Thor could not have taken a greater draught, but thou no doubt
meanest to make amends at the second pull.'
"Thor, without answering, went to it again with all his might, but
when he took the horn from his mouth it seemed to him as if he had
drunk rather less than before, although the horn could now be carried
without spilling.
"'How now, Thor,' said Utgard-Loki; 'thou must not spare thyself more
in performing a feat than befits thy skill; but if thou meanest to
drain the horn at the third draught thou must pull deeply; and I must
needs say that thou wilt not be called so mighty a man here as thou
art among the Æsir, if thou showest no greater prowess in other feats
than, methinks, will be shown in this.'
"Thor, full of wrath, again set the horn to his lips, and exerted
himself to the utmost to empty it entirely, but on looking in found
that the liquor was only a little lower, upon which he resolved to
make no further attempt, but gave back the horn to the cupbearer.
so stout as we thought thee, but wilt thou try any other feat, though,
methinks, thou art not likely to bear any prize away with thee hence.'
"'I will try another feat,' replied Thor, 'and I am sure such draughts
as I have been drinking would not have been reckoned small among the
Æsir; but what new trial hast thou to propose?'
"'We have a very, trifling game here,' answered Ut-gard-Loki, 'in
which we exercise none but children. It consists in merely lifting my
cat from the ground, nor should I have dared to mention such a feat to
Asa-Thor if I had not already observed that thou art by no means what
we took thee for.'
"As he finished speaking, a large grey cat sprung on the hall floor.
Thor advancing put his hand under the cat's belly, and did his utmost
to raise him from the floor, but the cat bending his back had,
notwithstanding all Thor's efforts, only one of his feet lifted up,
seeing which, Thor made no further attempt.
"'This trial has turned out,' said Utgard-Loki, 'just as I imagined it
would; the cat is large, but Thor is little in comparison to our men.'
"'Little as ye call me,' answered Thor, 'let me see who amongst you
will come hither now I am in wrath, and wrestle with me.'
"'I see no one here,' said Utgard-Loki, looking at the men sitting on
the benches, 'who would not think it beneath him to wrestle with thee;
let somebody, however, call hither that old crone, my nurse Elli,[136]
and let Thor wrestle with her if he will. She has thrown to the
ground many a man not less strong and mighty than this Thor is.'
Utgard-Loki to take hold of Thor. The tale is shortly told. The more
Thor tightened his hold on the crone the firmer she stood. At length,
after a very violent struggle, Thor began to lose his footing, and was
finally brought down upon one knee. Utgard-Loki then told them to
desist, adding that Thor had now no occasion to ask any one else in
the hall to wrestle with him, and it was also getting late. He
therefore showed Thor and his companions to their seats, and they
passed the night there in good cheer.
dressed themselves and prepared for their departure. Utgard-Loki then
came and ordered a table to be set for them, on which there was no
lack either of victuals or drink. After the repast Utgard-Loki led
them to the gate of the city, and, on parting, asked Thor how he
thought his journey had turned out, and whether he had met with any
men stronger than himself. Thor told him that he could not deny but
that he had brought great shame on himself. 'And what grieves me
most,' he added, 'is that ye will call me a man of little worth.'
now thou are out of the city which so long as I live, and have my way,
thou shalt never re-enter. And by my troth, had I known beforehand
that thou hadst so much strength in thee, and wouldst have brought me
so near to a great mishap, I would not have suffered thee to enter
this time. Know then that I have all along deceived thee by my
illusions; first, in the forest, where I arrived before thee, and
there thou wert not able to untie the wallet, because I had bound it
with iron wire, in such a manner that thou couldst not discover how
the knot ought to be loosened. After this, thou gavest me three blows
with thy mallet; the first, though the least, would have ended my days
had it fallen on me, but I brought a rocky mountain before me which
thou didst not perceive, and in this mountain thou wilt find three
glens, one of them remarkably deep. These are the dints made by thy
mallet. I have made use of similar illusions in the contests ye have
had with my followers. In the first, Loki, like hunger itself,
devoured all that was set before him, but Logi was, in reality,
nothing else than ardent fire, and therefore consumed not only the
meat but the trough which held it. Hugi, with whom Thjalfi contended
in running, was Thought, and it was impossible for Thjalfi to keep
pace with that. When thou, in thy turn, didst try to empty the horn,
thou didst perform, by my troth, a deed so marvellous, that had I not
seen it myself I should never have believed it. For one end of that
horn reached the sea, which thou wast not aware of, but when thou
comest to the shore thou wilt perceive how much the sea has sunk by
thy draughts, which have caused what is now called the ebb. Thou didst
perform a feat no less wonderful by lifting up the cat, and to tell
thee the truth, when we saw that one of his paws was off the floor, we
were all of us terror-stricken, for what thou tookest for a cat was
in reality the great Midgard serpent that encompassed the whole earth,
and he was then barely long enough to inclose it between his head and
tail, so high had thy hand raised him up towards heaven. Thy wrestling
with Elli was also a most astonishing feat, for there was never yet a
man, nor ever shall be, whom Old Age, for such in fact was Elli, will
not sooner or later lay low if he abide her coming. But now as we are
going to part, let me tell thee that it will be better for both of us
if thou never come near me again, for shouldst thou do so, I shall
again defend myself by other illusions, so that thou wilt never
prevail against me.'
"On hearing these words, Thor, in a rage, laid hold of his mallet and
would have launched it at him, but Utgard-Loki had disappeared, and
when Thor would have returned to the city to-destroy it, he found
nothing around him but a verdant plain. Proceeding, therefore, on his
way, he returned without stopping to Thrudvang. But he had already
resolved to make that attack on the Midgard serpent which afterwards
took place. I trust," concluded Thridi, "that thou wilt now
acknowledge that no one can tell thee truer tidings than those thou
hast heard respecting this journey of Thor to Jotunheim."
possesses great might in himself, though he has recourse to spells and
illusions; but his power may be seen by his followers, being in every
respect so skillful and dexterous. But tell me, did Thor ever avenge
this affront?"
"It is not unknown," replied Har, "though nobody has talked of it,
that Thor was determined to make amends for the journey just spoken
of, and he had not been long at home ere he set out again so hastily
that he had neither his car nor his goats, nor any followers with him.
He went out of Midgard under the semblance of a young man, and came at
dusk to the dwelling of a giant called Hymir. Here Thor passed the
night, but at break of day, when he perceived that Hymir was making
his boat ready for fishing, he arose and dressed himself, and begged
the giant would let him row out to sea with him. Hymir answered, that
a puny stripling like he was could be of no great use to him.
'Besides,' he added, 'thou wilt catch thy death of cold if I go so far
out and remain so long as I am accustomed to do.' Thor said, that for
all that, he would row as far from the land as Hymir had a mind, and
was not sure which of them would be the first who might wish to row
back again. At the same time he was so enraged that he felt sorely
inclined to let his mallet ring on the giant's skull without further
delay, but intending to try his strength elsewhere, he stifled his
wrath, and asked Hymir what he meant to bait with. Hymir told him to
look out for a bait himself. Thor instantly went up to a herd of oxen
that belonged to the giant, and seizing the largest bull, that bore
the name of Himinbrjot, wrung off his head, and returning with it to
the boat, put out to sea with Hymir. Thor rowed aft with two oars, and
with such force that Hymir, who rowed at the prow, saw with surprise,
how swiftly the boat was driven forward. He then observed that they
were come to the place where he was wont to angle for flat fish, but
Thor assured him that they had better go on a good way further. They
accordingly continued to ply their oars, until Hymir cried out that if
they did not stop they would be in danger from the great Midgard
serpent. Notwithstanding this, Thor persisted in rowing further, and
in spite of Hymir's remonstrances was a great while before he would
lay down his oars. He then took out a fishing-line, extremely strong,
furnished with an equally strong hook, on which he fixed the bull's
head, and cast his line into the sea. The bait soon reached the
bottom, and it may be truly said that Thor then deceived the Midgard
serpent not a whit less than Utgard-Loki had deceived Thor when he
obliged him to lift up the serpent in his hand: for the monster
greedily caught at the bait, and the hook stuck fast in his palate.
Stung with the pain, the serpent tugged at the hook so violently, that
Thor was obliged to hold fast with both hands by the pegs that bear
against the oars. But his wrath now waxed high, and assuming all his
divine power, he pulled so hard at the line that his feet forced their
way through the boat and went down to the bottom of the sea, whilst
with his hands he drew up the serpent to the side of the vessel. It is
impossible to express by words the dreadful scene that now took place.
Thor, on one hand, darting looks of ire on the serpent, whilst the
monster, rearing his head, spouted out floods of venom upon him. It is
said that when the giant Hymir beheld the serpent, he turned pale and
trembled with fright and seeing, moreover, that the water was
entering his boat on all sides, he took out his knife, just as Thor
raised his mallet aloft, and cut the line, on which the serpent sunk
again under the water. Thor, however, launched his mallet at him, and
there are some who say that it struck off the monster's head at the
bottom of the sea, but one may assert with more certainty that he
still lives and lies in the ocean. Thor then struck Hymir such a blow
with his fist, nigh the ear, that the giant fell headlong into the
water, and Thor, wading with rapid strides, soon came to the land
again."
performed on that journey, but did any other such events take place
among the Æsir?"
"Ay," replied Har, "I can tell thee of another event which the Æsir
deemed of much greater importance. Thou must know, therefore, that
Baldur the Good having been tormented with terrible dreams, indicating
that his life was in great peril, communicated them to the assembled
Æsir, who resolved to conjure all things to avert from him the
threatened danger. Then Frigga exacted an oath from fire and water,
from iron, and all other metals, as well as from stones, earths,
diseases, beasts, birds, poisons, and creeping things, that none of
them would do any harm to Baldur. When this was done, it became a
favourite pastime of the Æsir, at their meetings, to get Baldur to
stand up and serve them as a mark, some hurling darts at him, some
stones, while others hewed at him with their swords and battle-axes,
for do they what they would none of therm could harm him, and this was
regarded by all as a great honour shown to Baldur. But when Loki, the
son of Laufey, beheld the scene, he was sorely vexed that Baldur was
not hurt. Assuming, therefore, the shape of a woman, he went to
Fensalir, the mansion of Frigga. That goddess, when she saw the
pretended woman, inquired of her if she knew what the Æsir were doing
at their meetings. She replied, that they were throwing darts and
stones at Baldur without being able to hurt him.
"'Ay,' said Frigga, 'neither metal nor wood can hurt Baldur, for I
have exacted an oath from all of them.'
"'What!' exclaimed the woman, 'have all things sworn to spare Baldur?'
"'All things,' replied Frigga, 'except one little shrub that grows on
the eastern side of Valhalla, and is called Mistletoe, and which I
thought too young and feeble to crave an oath from.'
"As soon as Loki heard this he went away, and, resuming his natural
shape, cut off the mistletoe, and repaired to the place where the gods
were assembled. There he found Hodur standing apart, without partaking
of the sports, on account of his blindness, and going up to him, said,
'Why dost thou not also throw something at Baldur?"
"'Because I am blind,' answered Hodur, 'and see not where Baldur is,
and have, moreover, nothing to throw with.'
"'Come then,' said Loki, 'do like the rest, and show honour to Baldur
by throwing this twig at him, and I will direct thy arm, toward the
place where he stands.'
darted it at Baldur, who, pierced through and through, fell down
lifeless. Surely never was there witnessed, either among gods or men,
a more atrocious deed than this! When Baldur fell the Æsir were struck
speechless with horror, and then they looked at each other, and all
were of one mind to lay hands on him who had done the deed, but they
were obliged to delay their vengeance out of respect for the sacred
place (Peace-stead) where they were assembled. They at length gave
vent to their grief by loud lamentations, though not one of them could
find words to express the poignancy of his feelings. Odin, especially,
was more sensible than the others of the loss they had suffered, for
he foresaw what a detriment Baldur's death would be to the Æsir. When
the gods came to themselves, Frigga asked who among them wished to
gain all her love and good will; 'For this,' said she, 'shall he have
who will ride to Hel and try to find Baldur, and offer Hela a ransom
if she will let him return to Asgard;' whereupon Hermod, surnamed the
Nimble, the son of Odin, offered to undertake the journey. Odin's
horse Sleipnir was then led forth, on which Hermod mounted, and
galloped away on his mission.
where stood Baldur's ship Hringhorn, which passed for the largest in
the world. But when they wanted to launch it in order to make Baldur's
funeral pile on it, they were unable to make it stir. In this
conjuncture they sent to Jotunheim for a certain giantess named
Hyrrokin, who came mounted on a wolf, having twisted serpents for a
bridle. As soon as she alighted, Odin ordered four Berserkir to hold
her steed fast, who were, however, obliged to throw the animal on the
ground ere they could effect their purpose. Hyrrokin then went to the
ship, and with a single push set it afloat, but the motion was so
violent that the fire sparkled from the rollers, and the earth shook
all around. Thor, enraged at the sight, grasped his mallet, and but
for the interference of the Æsir would have broken the woman's skull.
Baldur's body was then borne to the funeral pile on board the ship,
and this ceremony had such an effect on Nanna, the daughter of Nep,
that her heart broke with grief, and her body was burnt on the same
pile with her husband's. Thor then stood up and hallowed the pile with
Mjolnir, and during the ceremony kicked a dwarf named Litur, who was
running before his feet, into the fire. There was a vast concourse of
various kinds of people at Baldur's obsequies. First came Odin,
accompanied by Frigga, the Valkyrjor and his ravens; then Frey in his
car drawn by a boar named Gullinbursti or Slidrugtanni; Heimdall rode
his horse called Gulltopp, and Freyja drove in her chariot drawn by
cats. There were also a great many Frost-giants and giants of the
mountains present. Odin laid on the pile the gold ring called
Draupnir, which afterwards acquired the property of producing every
ninth night eight rings of equal weight. Baldur's horse was led to the
pile fully caparisoned, and consumed in the same flames on the body
of his master.
of nine days, and as many nights, he rode through deep glens so dark
that he could not discern anything until he arrived at the river
Gjoll, which he passed over on a bridge covered with glittering gold.
Modgudur, the maiden who kept the bridge, asked him his name and
lineage, telling him that the day before five bands of dead persons
had ridden over the bridge, and did not shake it so much as he alone.
'But,' she added, 'thou hast not death's hue on thee, why then ridest
them here on the way to Hel?'
"'I ride to Hel,' answered Hermod, 'to seek Baldur. Hast thou
perchance seen him pass this way?'
"'Baldur,' she replied, 'hath ridden over Gjoll's bridge, but there
below, towards the north, lies the way to the abodes of death.'
"Hermod then pursued his journey until he came to the barred gates of
Hel. Here he alighted, girthed his saddle tighter, and remounting,
clapped both spurs to his horse, who cleared the gate by a tremendous
leap without touching it. Hermod then rode on to the palace, where he
found his brother Baldur occupying the most distinguished seat in the
hall, and passed the night in his company. The next morning he
besought Hela (Death) to let Baldur ride home with him, assuring her
that nothing but lamentations were to be heard among the gods. Hela
answered that it should now be tried whether Baldur was so beloved as
he was said to be.
"'If therefore,' she added, 'all things in the world, both living and
lifeless, weep for him, then shall he return to the Æsir, but if any
one thing speak against him or refuse to weep, he shall be kept in
Hel.'
"Hermod then rose, and Baldur led him out of the hall and gave him the
ring Draupnir, to present as a keepsake to Odin. Nanna also sent
Frigga a linen cassock and other gifts, and to Fulla a gold
finger-ring. Hermod then rode back to Asgard, and gave an account of
all he had heard and witnessed.
"The gods upon this dispatched messengers throughout the world, to beg
everything to weep, in order that Baldur might be delivered from Hel.
All things very willingly complied with this request, both men and
every other living being, as well as earths and stones, and trees and
metals, just as thou must have seen these things weep when they are
brought from a cold place into a hot one. As the messengers were
returning with the conviction that their mission had been quite
successful, they found an old hag named Thaukt sitting in a cavern,
and begged her to weep Baldur out of Hel.
"It was strongly suspected that this hag was no other than Loki
himself who never ceased to work evil among the Æsir."
in his having caused Baldur to be slain, and then preventing him from
being delivered out of Hel. But was he not punished for these crimes?"
"Ay," replied Har, "and in such a manner that he will long repent
having committed them. When he perceived how exasperated the gods
were, he fled and hid himself in the mountains. There he built him a
dwelling with four doors, so that he could see everything that passed
around him. Often in the daytime he assumed the likeness of a salmon,
and concealed himself under the waters of a cascade called
Franangursfors, where he employed himself in divining and
circumventing whatever stratagems the Æsir might have recourse to in
order to catch him. One day, as he sat in his dwelling, he took flax
and yarn, and worked them into meshes in the manner that nets have
since been made by fishermen. Odin, however, had descried his retreat
out of Hlidskjalf, and Loki becoming aware that the gods were
approaching, threw his net into the fire, and ran to conceal himself
in the river. When the gods entered the house, Kvasir, who was the
most distinguished among them all for his quickness and penetration,
traced out in the hot embers the vestiges of the net which had been
burnt, and told Odin that it must be an invention to catch fish.
Whereupon they set to work and wove a net after the model they saw
imprinted in the ashes. This net, when finished, they threw into the
river in which Loki had hidden himself. Thor held one end of the net,
and all the other gods laid hold of the other end, thus jointly
drawing it along the stream. Notwithstanding all their precautions the
net passed over Loki, who had crept between two stones, and the gods
only perceived that some living thing had touched the meshes. They
therefore cast their net a second time, hanging so great a weight to
it that it everywhere raked the bed of the river. But Loki, perceiving
that he had but a short distance from the sea, swam onwards and leapt
over the net into the waterfall. The Æsir instantly followed him, and
divided themselves into two bands. Thor, wading along in mid-stream,
followed the net, whilst the others dragged it along towards the sea.
Loki then perceived that he had only two chances of escape, either to
swim out to sea, or to leap again over the net. He chose the latter,
but as he took a tremendous leap Thor caught him in his hand. Being,
however, extremely slippery, he would have escaped had not Thor held
him fast by the tail, and this is the reason why salmons have had
their tails ever since so fine and thin.
"The gods having thus captured Loki, dragged him without commiseration
into a cavern, wherein they placed three sharp-pointed rocks, boring a
hole through each of them. Having also seized Loki's children, Vali
and Nari, they changed the former into a wolf, and in this likeness he
tore his brother to pieces and devoured him. The gods then made cords
of his intestines, with which they bound Loki on the points of the
rocks, one cord passing under his shoulders, another under his loins,
and a third under his hams, and afterwards transformed these cords
into thongs of iron. Skadi then suspended a serpent over him in such a
manner that the venom should fall on his face, drop by drop. But
Siguna, his wife, stands by him and receives the drops as they fall in
a cup, which she empties as often as it is filled. But while she is
doing this, venom falls upon Loki, which makes him howl with horror,
and twist his body about so violently that the whole earth shakes, and
this produces what men call earthquakes. There will Loki lie until
Ragnarok."
thou to tell me about it?"
"There are many very notable circumstances concerning it," replied
Har, "which I can inform thee of. In the first place will come the
winter, called Fimbul-winter, during which snow will fall from the
four corners of the world; the frosts will be very severe, the wind
piercing, the weather tempestuous, and the sun impart no gladness.
Three such winters shall pass away without being tempered by a single
summer. Three other similar winters follow, during which war and
discord will spread over the whole globe. Brethren for the sake of
mere gain shall kill each other, and no one shall spare either his
parents or his children.
prodigies. The wolf shall devour the sun, and a severe loss will that
be for mankind. The other wolf will take the moon, and this too will
cause great mischief. Then the stars shall be hurled from the heavens,
and the earth so violently shaken that trees will be torn up by the
roots, the tottering mountains tumble headlong from their foundations,
and all bonds and fetters be shivered in pieces. Fenrir then breaks
loose, and the sea rushes over the earth, on account of the Midgard
serpent turning with giant force, and gaining the land. On the waters
floats the ship Naglfar, which is constructed of the nails of dead
men. For which reason great care should be taken to die with pared
nails, for he who dies with his nails unpared, supplies materials for
the building of this vessel, which both gods and men wish may be
finished as late as possible. But in this flood shall Naglfar float,
and the giant Hrym be its steersman.
"The wolf Fenrir advancing, opens his enormous mouth; the lower jaw
reaches to the earth, and the upper one to heaven, and would in fact
reach still farther were there space to admit of it. Fire flashes from
his eyes and nostrils. The Midgard serpent, placing himself by the
side of the wolf, vomits forth floods of poison which overwhelm the
air and the waters. Amidst this devastation heaven is cleft in twain,
and the sons of Muspell ride through the breach. Surtur rides first,
and both before and behind him flames burning fire. His sword
outshines the sun itself. Bifrost, as they ride over it, breaks to
pieces. Then they direct their course to the battlefield called
Vigrid. Thither also repair the wolf Fenrir and the Midgard serpent,
and also Loki, with all the followers of Hel, and Hrym with all the
Hrimthursar. But the sons of Muspell keep their effulgent bands apart
on the field of battle, which is one hundred miles long on every side.
Gjallar-horn to arouse the gods, who assemble without delay. Odin
then rides to Mimir's well and consults Mimir how he and his warriors
ought to enter into action. The ash Yggdrasill begins to shake, nor is
there anything in heaven or earth exempt from fear at that terrible
hour. The Æsir and all the heroes of Valhalla arm themselves and speed
forth to the field, led on by Odin, with his golden helm and
resplendent cuirass, and his spear called Gungnir. Odin places himself
against the wolf Fenrir; Thor stands by his side, but can render him
no assistance, having himself to combat with the Midgard serpent. Frey
encounters Surtur, and terrible blows are exchanged ere Frey falls;
and he owes his defeat to his not having that trusty sword he gave to
Skirnir. That day the dog Garm, who had been chained in the Gnipa
cave, breaks loose. He is the most fearful monster of all, and attacks
Tyr, and they kill each other. Thor gains great renown for killing the
Midgard serpent, but at the same time, recoiling nine paces, falls
dead upon the spot suffocated by the floods of venom which the dying
serpent vomits forth upon him. The wolf swallows Odin, but at that
instant Vidar advances, and setting his foot on the monster's lower
jaw, seizes the other with his hand, and thus tears and rends him till
he dies. Vidar is able to do this because he wears those shoes for
which stuff has been gathering in all ages, namely, the shreds of
leather which are cut off to form the toes and heels of shoes, and it
is on this account that those who would render a service to the Æsir
should take care to throw such shreds away. Loki and Heimdall fight,
and mutually kill each other.
"After this, Surtur darts fire and flame over the earth, and the
whole universe is consumed."
the whole universe shall be consumed, and after all the gods, and the
heroes of Valhalla, and all mankind shall have perished? For ye have
already told me that every one shall continue to exist in some world
or other, throughout eternity."
"There will be many abodes," replied Thridi, "some good, others bad.
The best place of all to be in will be Gimli, in heaven, and all who
delight in quaffing good drink will find a great store in the hall
called Brimir, which is also in heaven in the region Okolni. There is
also a fair hall of ruddy gold called Sindri, which stands on the
mountains of Nida, (Nidafjoll). In those halls righteous and
well-minded men shall abide. In Nastrond there is a vast and direful
structure with doors that face the north. It is formed entirely of the
backs of serpents, wattled together like wicker work. But the
serpents' heads are turned towards the inside of the hall, and
continually vomit forth floods of venom, in which wade all those
who-commit murder, or who forswear themselves."
heaven and an earth?" demanded Gangler.
"There will arise out of the sea," replied Har, "another earth most
lovely and verdant, with pleasant fields where the grain shall grow
unsown. Vidar and Vali shall survive; neither the flood nor Surtur's
fire shall harm them. They shall dwell on the plain of Ida, where
Asgard formerly stood. Thither shall come the sons of Thor, Modi and
Magni, bringing with them their father's mallet Mjolnir. Baldur and
Hodur shall also repair thither from the abode of death (Hel). There
shall they sit and converse together, and call to mind their former
knowledge and the perils they underwent, and the fight of the wolf
Fenrir and the Midgard serpent. There too shall they find in the grass
those golden tablets (orbs) which the Æsir once possessed. As it is
said,--
"'There dwell Vidar and Vali
In the gods' holy seats,
When slaked Surtur's fire is
But Modi and Magni
Will Mjolnir possess,
And strife put an end to.'
"Thou must know, moreover, that during the conflagration caused by
Surtur's fire, a woman named Lif (Life), and a man named Lifthrasir,
lie concealed in Hodmimir's forest. They shall feed on morning dew,
and their descendants shall soon spread over the whole earth.
"But what thou wilt deem more wonderful is, that the sun shall have
brought forth a daughter more lovely than herself, who shall go in the
same track formerly trodden by her mother.
"And now," continued Thridi, "if thou hast any further questions to
ask, I know not who can answer thee, for I never heard tell of any
one who could relate what will happen in the other ages of the world.
Make, therefore, the best use thou canst of what has been imparted to
thee."
Upon this Gangler heard a terrible noise all around him: he looked
everywhere, but could see neither palace nor city, nor anything save a
vast plain. He therefore set out on his return to his own kingdom,
where he related all that he had seen and heard, and ever since that
time these tidings have been handed down by oral tradition.
he met with a very good reception. Supper time being come, the twelve
mighty Æsir,--Odin, Thor, Njord, Frey, Tyr, Heimdall, Bragi, Vidar,
Vali, Ullur, Hoenir and Forseti, together with the Asynjor,--Frigga,
Freyja, Gefjon, Iduna, Gerda, Siguna, Fulla and Nanna, seated
themselves on their lofty doom seats, in a hall around which were
ranged swords of such surpassing brilliancy that no other light was
requisite. They continued long at table, drinking mead of a very
superior quality. While they were emptying their capacious drinking
horns, Ægir, who sat next to Bragi, requested him to relate something
concerning the Æsir. Bragi instantly complied with his request, by
informing him of what had happened to Iduna.
they came to a valley where a herd of oxen were grazing, and being
sadly in want of provisions did not scruple to kill one for their
supper. Vain, however, were their efforts to boil the flesh; they
found it, every time they took off the lid of the kettle, as raw as
when first put in. While they were endeavouring to account for this
singular circumstance a noise was heard above them, and on looking up
they beheld an enormous eagle perched on the branch of an oak tree.
'If ye are willing to let me have my share of the flesh,' said the
eagle, 'it shall soon be boiled;' and on their assenting to this
proposal, it flew down and snatched up a leg and two shoulders of the
ox--a proceeding which so incensed Loki, that he laid hold of a large
stock, and made it fall pretty heavily on the eagle's back. It was,
however, not an eagle that Loki struck, but the renowned giant
Thjassi, clad in his eagle plumage. Loki soon found this out to his
cost, for while one end of the stock stuck fast to the eagle's back,
he was unable to let go his hold of the other end, and was
consequently trailed by the eagle-clad giant over rocks and forests,
until he was almost torn to pieces. Loki in this predicament began to
sue for peace, but Thjassi told him that he should never be released
from his hold until he bound himself by a solemn oath to bring Iduna
and her apples out of Asgard. Loki very willingly gave his oath to
effect this object, and went back in a piteous plight to his
companions.
short distance from the celestial residence, he had found apples
growing which he thought were of a much better quality than her own,
and that at all events it was worth while making a comparison between
them. Iduna, deceived by his words, took her apples, and went with him
into the forest, but they had no sooner entered it than Thjassi, clad
in his eagle-plumage, flew rapidly towards them, and catching up
Iduna, carried her treasure off with him to Jotunheim. The gods being
thus deprived of their renovating apples, soon became wrinkled and
grey; old age was creeping fast upon them, when they discovered that
Loki had been, as usual, the contriver of all the mischief that had
befallen them. They therefore threatened him with condign punishment
if he did not instantly hit upon some expedient for bringing back
Iduna and her apples to Asgard. Loki having borrowed from Freyja her
falcon-plumage, flew to Jotunheim, and finding that Thjassi was out at
sea fishing, lost no time in changing Iduna into a sparrow and flying
off with her; but when Thjassi returned and became aware of what had
happened, he donned his eagle-plumage, and flew after them. When the
Æsir saw Loki approaching, holding Iduna transformed into a sparrow
between his claws, and Thjassi with his outspread eagle wings ready to
overtake him, they placed on the walls of Asgard bundles of chips,
which they set fire to the instant that Loki had flown over them; and
as Thjassi could not stop his flight, the fire caught his plumage, and
he thus fell into the power of the Æsir, who slew him within the
portals of the celestial residence. When these tidings came to
Thjassi's daughter, Skadi, she put on her armour and went to Asgard,
fully determined to avenge her father's death; but the Æsir having
declared their willingness to atone for the deed, an amicable
arrangement was entered into. Skadi was to choose a husband in Asgard,
and the Æsir were to make her laugh, a feat which she flattered
herself it would be impossible for any one to accomplish. Her choice
of a husband was to be determined by a mere inspection of the feet of
the gods, it being stipulated that the feet should be the only part of
their persons visible until she had made known her determination. In
inspecting the row of feet placed before her, Skadi took a fancy to a
pair which she flattered herself, from their fine proportions, must be
those of Baldur. They were however Njord's, and Njord was accordingly
given her for a husband, and as Loki managed to make her laugh, by
playing some diverting antics with a goat, the atonement was fully
effected. It is even said that Odin did more than had been stipulated,
by taking out Thjassi's eyes, and placing them to shine as stars in
the firmament.[137]
Bragi informed him that the Æsir and Vanir having met to put an end to
the war which had long been carried on between them, a treaty of
peace was agreed to and ratified by each party spitting into a jar. As
a lasting sign of the amity which was thenceforward to subsist between
the contending parties, the gods formed out of this spittle a being to
whom they gave the name of Kvasir, and whom they endowed with such a
high degree of intelligence that no one could ask him a question that
he was unable to answer. Kvasir then traversed the whole world to
teach men wisdom, but was at length treacherously murdered by the
dwarfs, Fjalar and Galar, who, by mixing up his blood with honey,
composed a liquor of such surpassing excellence that whoever drinks of
it acquires the gift of song. When the Æsir inquired what had become
of Kvasir, the dwarfs told them that he had been suffocated with his
own wisdom, not being able to find any one who by proposing to him a
sufficient number of learned questions might relieve him of its
superabundance. Not long after this event, Fjalar and Galar managed to
drown the giant Gilling and murder his wife, deeds which were avenged
by their son Suttung taking the dwarfs out to sea, and placing them on
a shoal which was flooded at high water. In this critical position
they implored Suttung to spare their lives, and accept the
verse-inspiring beverage which they possessed as an atonement for
their having killed his parents. Suttung having agreed to these
conditions, released the dwarfs, and carrying the mead home with him,
committed it to the care of his daughter Gunnlauth. Hence poetry is
indifferently called Kvasir's blood, Suttung's mead, the dwarf's
ransom, etc.
a beverage, on which Bragi informed him that Odin being fully
determined to acquire it, set out for Jotunheim, and after journeying
for some time, came to a meadow in which nine thralls were mowing.
Entering into conversation with them, Odin, offered to whet their
scythes, an offer which they gladly accepted, and finding that the
whetstone he made use of had given the scythes an extraordinary
sharpness, asked him whether he was willing to dispose of it. Odin,
however, threw the whetstone in the air, and in attempting to catch it
as it fell, each thrall brought his scythe to bear on the neck of one
of his comrades, so that they were all killed in the scramble. Odin
took up his night's lodging at the house of Suttung's brother, Baugi,
who told him that he was sadly at a loss for labourers, his nine
thralls having slain each other. Odin, who went under the name of
Baulverk, said that for a draught of Suttung's mead he would do the
work of nine men for him. The terms agreed on, Odin worked for Baugi
the whole summer, but Suttung was deaf to his brother's entreaties,
and would not part with a drop of the precious liquor, which was
carefully preserved in a cavern under his daughter's custody. Into
this cavern Odin was resolved to penetrate. He therefore persuaded
Baugi to bore a hole through the rock, which he had no sooner done
than Odin, transforming himself into a worm, crept through the
crevice, and resuming his natural shape, won the heart of Gunnlauth.
After passing three nights with the fair maiden, he had no great
difficulty in inducing her to let him take a draught out of each of
the three jars, called Odhroerir, Bodn, and Son, in which the mead was
kept. But wishing to make the most of his advantage, he pulled so deep
that not a drop was left in the vessels. Transforming himself into an
eagle, he then flew off as fast as his wings could carry him, but
Suttung becoming aware of the stratagem, also took upon himself an
eagle's guise, and flew after him. The Æsir, on seeing him approach
Asgard, set out in the yard all the jars they could lay their hands
on, which Odin filled by discharging through his beak the
wonder-working liquor he had drunken. He was however, so near being
caught by Suttung, that some of the liquor escaped him by an impurer
vent, and as no care was taken of this it fell to the share of the
poetasters. But the liquor discharged in the jars was kept for the
gods, and for those men who have sufficient wit to make a right use of
it. Hence poetry is also called Odin's booty, Odin's gift, the
beverage of the gods, &c, &c.
copyist, for it has evidently no connection with the following one,
and is not found in the Upsal MS. of the Prose Edda, which is supposed
to be the oldest extant. Gefjon's ploughing is obviously a mythic way
of accounting for some convulsions of nature, perhaps the convulsion
that produced the Sound, and thus effected a junction between the
Baltic and the Northern Ocean.]
flaming and burning, and it is impervious to those who are outlandish
(foreign), and not indigenous there" (or who have no home or heritage
therein).]
encircled.]
chariot.]
Iduna--the ever-renovating Spring--being in the possession of
Thjassi--the desolating winter--all nature languishes until she is
delivered from her captivity. On this being effected, her presence
again diffuses joy and gladness, and all things revive; while her
pursuer, Winter, with his icy breath, dissolves in the solar rays
indicated by the fires lighted on the walls of Asgard.]
ÆGIR or OEGIR, horror, terror.
ÆSIR, sing. AS; God, Gods. ASYNJA, ASYNJOR; Goddess, Goddesses.
AI, from a, a river.
ALFADIR, or ALFODUR, All-Father, or the Father of All.
ALFR, Elf.
ALSVIDR, All-scorching.
ALTHJOFR, lit. All-thief, an accomplished rascal.
ALVISS, All-wise.
AMSVARTNIR, grief, black, gloomy, swart.
ANDHRIMNIR, soul, spirit, breath: from hrim, congealed vapour, _rime_.
ANDLANGR, from aund, spirit, breath; and langr, long.
ANDVARI, prob. from aund, spirit; cautious, timid.
ANGURBODI, Anguish-boding, announcing or presaging calamity.
ARVAKR, awakening early; ar, the dawn, Aurora.
ASGARD, prop. ASGARDR, lit. God's-ward, or the abode of the gods.
ASKR, an ash-tree.
AUDHUMLA, void, vacuity, darkness, tenebrosity.
AUDR, rich, wealthy.
AURBODA, prop. AURBODA, snow, rain, storm; to announce whence; a
messenger; hence an ambassador.
AUSTRI, East, Oriental.
BALDUR, prop. BALDR or BALLDR, fire, flame, bold.
BALEYGR, Bale-eyed, _i.e._ endowed with a clear, piercing vision.
BAREY, the Frondiferous-isle; an island.
BAULVERKR, Evil-worker; producing evil, calamity.
BAUMBURR, prob. cog. with bumbr, belly, cavity.
BELI, prob. from belja, to bellow.
BERGELMIR, Mountain-old, _i.e._ the old man of the mountain.
BIFLINDI, the Inconstant: from bif, motion; and lyndi, disposition,
mind.
BIFROST, BIF-RAUST, the Tremulous-bridge of the Aerial-bridge,
signifying also aerial: a certain space, a mile, a rest.
BIL, a moment, an interval, an interstice.
BILEYGR, endowed with fulminating eyes, a tempest, especially a
fulminating tempest or thunder-storm.
BILSKIRNIR, sometimes stormy, and sometimes serene; which, as Thor's
mansion prob. denotes the atmosphere, would be a very appropriate
term; or storm-stilling, _i.e._ imparting serenity to the tempest.
BIVAURR, BIVORR, or BIFUR, the Tremulous.
BODN, originally signified an offer-table or altar; an oblation; also
one of the jars in which the dwarfs' poetical beverage was kept.
BOLTHORN, lit. Calamitous or Evil-thorn.
BOR, prop. BORR, and BUR, prop. BURR or BURI, means _born_, to bear;
whence also the _Old G._ barn, and the _Scotch, bairn_, a child.
BRAGI, the name of the God of Poetry; from braga, to glisten, to
shine, or from bragga, to adorn; ph. cog. with _G_. pracht, splendour.
BREIDABLIK: lit. Broad-blink--wide-glancing, Expanded splendour, to
blink.
BRIMIR, prob. from brimi, flame.
BRISINGR, may prob. mean flaming.
BYLEISTR, a dwelling, a town; to destroy, to break to pieces.
BYRGIR, prob. from v. byrgja, to conceal; _E._ to bury, whence barrow,
a tumulus.
DAINN, prob. the Soporiferous; from da, a swoon, or complete repose.
DELLINGR--a _day-ling_. with the dawn, daybreak.
DIS, pi. DISIR, it originally sig. a female, but was afterwards used
in the sense of Nymph and Goddess. It enters into the composition of
several female names, as Thordis, Freydis, Vegdis, &c.
DOLGTHRASIR: a dolgr, a warrior; contentious, obstinate, persisting,
from the v. thrasa, to litigate, to quarrel.
DRAUPNIR, from the v. drupa, to droop, or the v. drjupa, to drip.
DROMI, strongly binding.
DUNEYRR, a hollow sound, from the v. dynja, to sound, to resound.
DURATHROR. The first sylb. may be derived either from dur, a light
sleep, or from dyr, a door; and the last, either from the v. threyja,
to expect, to wait for; or from throa, to increase, to enlarge.
DURINN, prob. from dur, a light sleep, to fall asleep; whence prob.
the _E._ to doze, and ph. also dusk.
DVALJNN, from dvali, sleep.
EIKINSKJALDI, furnished with an oaken shield, scarlet oak.
EIKTHYRNIR. Eik is the ilex or scarlet oak; thyrnir, a thorn;
metaphorically for a stag's antlers.
EINHERJAR, a hero; select, chosen heroes.
EIR, to befriend, to tranquilize.
ELDHRIMNIR: eldr, elementary flre: brim, congealed vapour, rime, also
soot; hence (a kettle) sooty from flre.
ELIVAGAR, stormy waves; a storm; the sea; an estuary; water; wave.
ELLI, old age.
ELVIDNIR, ph. from el, a storm; and vidr, wide.
EMBLA. The etymologies of the name of the first woman given by the
_E.E._ are merely _conjectural_. Grimm says the word embla, emla,
signifies a busy woman, from amr, ambr, amil ambl, assiduous labour;
the same relation as Meshia and Meshiane, the ancient Persian names of
the first man and woman, who were also formed from trees.
FALHOFNIR, a nail, a lamina, hoof.
FARMAGUD, the God of Carriers and Sea-farers.
FENRIR, FENRIS-ULFR, may mean dweller in an abyss, or the monster
wolf.
FENSALIR, lit. Fen-saloon, from fen, a fen, but which it would appear
may also be made to sig. the watery deep, or the sea; and salr, a
hall, mansion, saloon. _See_ Valhalla.
FIMBUL. From fimbulfambi comes the _E._ provincialism, to
fimble-famble; and the _D._ famle, to stammer, to hesitate in
speaking.
FIMBULTHUL. Thulr means an orator or reciter, to speechify.
FIMBULVETR: vetr, winter; according to Grimm's explanation of fimbul,
_the Great Winter_.
FJALARR and FJOLNIR. Multiform: in composition fjol, many.
FJOLSVIDR or FJOLSVITHR, to scorch: or ph. from svithr, wise,
powerful, potent, strong.
FJORGYN. Grimm, we think, has satisfactorily shown that fjorg is the
_G._ berg, a mountain.
FOLKVANGR, lit. the folk's field, or habitation.
FORSETI, lit. the Fore-seated, _i.e._ the Judge.
FRANANGURS-FORS, prob. from frann, glittering, and ongr, narrow.
FREKI, _G._ frech, froward: the word has also the sig. of voracious.
FREYR and FREYJA. The name of the deity who was the symbol of the
sun--to mean Seminator, the Fructifler, Freyja--the symbolical
representation of the moon--means the Seminated, the Fructified; the
original sig, is that of glad, joyful, imparting gladness, beautous,
lovely.
FRIGGA, prop. FRIGG. Grimm has shown that the root of this word is, if
not strictly syn., at least very nearly allied with that of the word
Freyja, and explains it to mean the Free, the Beauteous, the Winsome.
FROSTI, the _E._ frosty.
FULLA, abundance; from fullr, full.
FUNDINN, found; from v. finna, to find.
GANDALFR. Alfr, an elf, prob. sig. a wolf, a serpent.
GANGLER, the tired wanderer; to debilitate, to tire.
GANGRAD, prop. GANGRADR, indicates a person directing his steps.
GARDROFA, Fence-breaker; to break, to break through.
GARMR, voracious; to gorge; gourmand.
GAUTR, ph. may sig. a keeper, to keep.
GEFJON, the earth; also separation, disruption.
GEFN, from the v. gefa, to give.
GEIROLUL, lit. Spear-alimentrix: from the v. ala, to aliment, to
nourish.
GEIRRAUDR, lit. spear-red; hence King Spear-rubifler.
GEIRVIMUL, a river rushing or vibrating like a spear or javelin.
GELGJA, from galgi, a gallows.
GERDA, prop. GERDUR, to gird. Both gerd and gard are common
terminations of female names, as Hildigard, Irminigard, Thorgerda, &c.
GERI. Geri may be derived from gerr, covetous, greedy.
GIMLI, had the same sig. as himill, heaven, the original sig. of which
may have been fire, but afterwards a gem, as in the _N._ word
gimsteinn; whence also our colloquial words, gim, gimmy (neat), and
gimcrack.
GINNARR, Seducer; from v. ginna, to seduce.
GINNUNGA-GAP may be rendered the gap of gaps; a gaping abyss.
GJALLAR (horn); from the v. gjalla, to resound, to clang; to yell.
GJOIX, prob. from gjallr, sonorous, fulgid.
GLADR, glad; from v. gledja, to gladden.
GLADSHEIMR: lit. Glad's-home; the abode of gladness or bliss.
GLÆR, from glær, clear, pellucid; cog. with _E._ glare.
GLEIPNIR, the Devouring; from the v. gleipa, to devour.
GLITNIR, the Glittering; from the v. glitra; to glitter, and to
glisten.
GLOINN, the Glowing; from v. gloa, to glow.
GOD. The _Old N._ lang. has two words for God, viz. God and Gud; and
it would appear that the n. god was used for an idol, and the m. gud.
for a God. Both words are, however, frequently applied to denote a
celestial deity. The Scandinavian Pontiff-chieftains were called Godar
(in the sing. Godi).
GOMUL, prob. from gamall, old.
GRABAKR, Gray-back.
GRAFJOLLUDR, Gray-skin; the skin of an animal.
GRAFVITNIR, from the v. grafa, to dig, to delve; cog. with _E._ grave:
and the v. vita, to know; _to_ wit, wist, wot.
GRIMAR, and GRIMNIR, a helmet, or any kind of a covering; used
poetically for night, the sun being then veiled or covered.
GULLINBURSTI, Golden-bristles.
GULLTOPPR, Golden-mane; crest, the top of anything, hence mane.
GUNNTHRA. The first sylb. of this word is from gunnr, war, a combat;
to increase, to enlarge; thra sig. grief, calamity; and thro, a
cavity, a fosse. From gunnr is derived the _N._ gunn-fani, a
war-banner.
GYLLIR, from gull, gold.
HABROK. The E.E. render this word by _Altipes_, from bar, high; and
brok, lit. breeches, brogues, but which they assume may also sig. a
bird's leg.
HALLINSKITHI, to decline; hence it would be an appropriate term for
the post-meridian sun.
HAMSKEKPIR, prob. from hams, hide; and the v. skerpa, to sharpen, also
to dry, to indurate.
HAPTAGUD, ph. from haupt, a nexus, a tie, a band.
HAR, prop. HARR, may mean either _high_ or _hairy_. As a designation
of Odin it has undoubtedly the former signification. As the name of a
dwarf, the latter sig. would be more appropriate.
HARBARDR, Hairy-beard.
HEIDRUN, serene, etherial; a heath.
HEIMDALLR: heimr, home, the world.
HELA, prop. HEL., gen. HELJAR, the Goddess of the Infernal Regions,
used instead of Helheimr for those regions themselves.
HELBLINDI: hel, see the preceding word; blindi, from blundr, slumber.
HEPTI, prob. means impeding, constraining; to seize, to take by force,
to adhere to.
HERFJOTUR, lit. Host's-fetter, _i.e._ having the power to impede or
constrain an army at will: her, an army, a host, a multitude.
HERJANN, the leader of an army; from her.
HERMOD, prop. HERMODR: her from her, courage, (_see_ Modgudur).
HERTEITR, gay amongst warriors, a jovial soldier; glad, joyful.
HILDUR (Hilda), war, a combat. Hence we find it in a number of
Teutonic prop, names both m. and f., as Hilderic, Childeric, Hildegrim
(the Helm of War), Brynhildr (Brunhilda), Clothild (Clothilda), &c.
HIMINBJORG, the Heavenly-Mountains, the Comprehending, the
All-embracing.
HIMINBRJOTR, Heaven-breaking: from the v. brjota, to break.
HJALMBERI, Helmet-bearing.
HJUKI, to keep warm, to nourish, to cherish.
HLIDSKJALF, a slope, a declivity; also to waver, to tremble.
HLINA, prop. HLIN, the _support_ on which a person leans, _i.e._ a
tutelary deity.
HLJODALFR, the Genius or Elf of Sound.
HLODYN, the name of Frigga, as the symbol of the earth; _protectress
of the hearth_--of the household. The Romans also worshipped a goddess
of the earth and of fire under the common name of Fornax, dea
fornacalis. Grimm mentions a stone found at Cleves with the remarkable
inscription--DEAE HLUDANAE SACRVM C. TIBERIVS VERVS, and remarks that
Hludana was neither a Roman nor a Celtic goddess, and could be no
other than Hlodyn, which shows the identity of the German and
Scandinavian Mythology.
HLOKK, or HLAUKK, to exalt, to clang, to cry like an eagle.
HNIKARR, or NIKARR, victor, a conqueror; to move, to agitate; to
thrust forward, to take by violence; to repel, to impede. _G._ m. Nix,
fern. Nixe, an aquatic genius. We may remark that the monks having
transformed Odin into the devil, our designation of his Satanic
Majesty, as _Old Nick_ appears to be a mere corruption of these
appellations of the Teutonic divinity.
HNOSSA, a ball of yarn, a clew of thread, a knot.
HODUR, prop. HODR. Grimm thinks that the original signification may
have been war, combat.
HOFVARPNIR, a horse that plies well its hoofs, a good goer.
HRÆSVELGUR, lit. Raw-swallower, _i.e._ swallowing raw flesh like an
eagle.
HRAFNAGUD, the Ravens' god; brafn; _G._ rabe; _E._ raven.
HRIMFAXI: brim, rime, or hoar frost; fax, a crest, a mane. The _E._
prop, name Fairfax, means fair-haired.
HRIMTHURSAR, the Rim or Frost Giants: thurs, a giant.
HRINGHORN, lit. a ringed or annulated horn.
HRIST, from v. hrista, to shake, to agitate.
HRYM, HRYMUR, prob. from brim, rime--hoar frost.
HUGI, and HUGINN, from hugr, spirit, breath, thought, mind, reason.
HVERGELMIR, the roaring cauldron; a spring of hot water.
HYRROKIN, lit. Smoky-fire; utter darkness, also smoke.
IDAVOLLR: vollr, a field, a place; to flow together; to ramble, to
take a pleasant walk.
IDUNA, prop. IDUNN or ITHUNN. May mean one who loves either the
confluence of waters, or to work, or to take a pleasant ramble.
JAFNHAR. _The Equally High_; lit. even so high.
JARNVIDR, Iron-wood.
JORD, JORTH, the earth.
JORMUNGANDR. Gandr sig. serpent, and more prop, wolf: jormun is a word
of uncertain origin, but appears in all the anc. Teutonic lang. to
have expressed the idea of great, maximus, universal. The reader will
find much curious information on this subject in Grimm's admirable
work.
JOTUNHEIMR, lit. Giants'-home, the region of the Giants.
KERLAUG: ker, any kind of vessel, cup, bowl, &c; also used to denote
the bed of a river.
KJALARR, prob. from v. kjala, to transport, to convey; a ship, _a
keel_.
KVASIR. This word seems to be used in the sense of a _drinking bout._
LAUFEY, lit. Frondiferous-isle; an island.
LETTFETI, Lightfoot: light.
LIFTHRASIR, vital energy, longevity, life; enduring a long time.
LITUR, colour, complexion, form, the face.
LODURR, LODR, LOTHR, from the ob. _N._ lod, fire.
LOFNA, prop. LOFN, appears allegorlcally to denote perennial and
unchangeable love.
LOGI, Flame; a log of wood burnt or to be burnt.
LOKI, to shut; whence the _E._ to lock, to finish.
LOPTUR, the Aerial, the Sublime; the air; whence the _E._ lofty and
aloft, also a (hay) loft.
LYNGVI, from lyng or ling, the sweet broom, heath or ling.
MAGNI, the Potent, the Powerful; force, energy.
MANAGARMR, lit. the moon's wolf; a monster wolf or dog, voracious.
MANI, the moon.
MARDOLL, Sea-nymph; mere, the sea; whence our word mere, as
Windermere, Buttermere, &c: doll, a nymph; poetically a woman.
MEGINGJARDIR, the Girdle of Might, the Belt of Prowess.
MIDGARD, middleweard, the middleward; _see_ Asgard. Middling, mean.
MIMIR, or MIMER, to keep In memory; to be fanciful; mindful.
MJODVITNIR, lit. knowing in mead; wine; madja, palm-wine,
MJOLNIR, or MJOLLNIR, prob. from v. melja, to pound, or v. mala, to
grind; _E._ mill, and prob. with _L._ malleus, a mallet.
MODGUDUR, a valiant female warrior, _animosa bellona_: courage; mind;
_E._ mood; gracefulness, delectation.
MODSOGNIR, lit. sucking in courage or vigour.
MOINN, dwelling on a moor.
MUNINN, mind; _memory_, recollection; _G._ minne, love.
MUSPELLHEIMR, Muspell's region or home; used in the sense of elemental
or empyreal fire.
NAGLFAR, a nail from nagl, a human nail; according to the Prose Edda,
"constructed of the nails of dead men"; a seafaring man.
NAL. _G._ nadel; _A.S._ nædl; _E._ a needle.
NANNA. Grimm derives this word from the v. nenna, to dare.
NAR, a corpse.
NASTROND, a corpse; The Strand of the Dead.
NAUDUR, necessity; need.
NAUT, ph. from the v. njota, to make use of.
NIDAFJOLL, a rock, a mountain.
NIDHOGG, a phrase used to indicate the new and the waning moon.
NIDI, from nidr, downwards.
NIFLHEIMR, lit. Nebulous-home--the shadowy region of death.
NIFLHEL, from nifi and hel. _See_ the latter word.
NIFLUNGAR, the mythic-heroic ghosts of the shadowy realms of death.
NIPINGR, handsome; to contract, to curve.
NJORD, prop. NJORDR, humid; _Sk._ nar, nir, water; a wave; and
Neriman, an aquatic man.
NOTT; _D._ nat; _M.G._ naht; _G._ nacht; _A.S._ niht; _E._ night.
NYI, these dwarfs were symbolical of the new and the waning moon.
ODIN. _E._ to _wade_ through, consequently the Omnipotent Being that
_permeates all things_.
ODUR, the name of Freyja's husband. Odur may, like Kvasir, be the
personification of poetry.
ODHROERIR, Mind-exciting; the name of a vessel or kettle.
OFNIR, _E._ to weave. The word would thus sig. the textile or creating
power of Odin.
OMI, from omr, a sound, a crash; a name given to Odin, when like, the
Brahmlnlc Indra, he rattles aloft during a battle, or at daybreak.
ONDURDIS, Snow skates; _E._ to wander; dis, a nymph, a goddess.
ORGELMIR, Primordial Giant; also to roar, to howl, to clang, to
resound.
ORI, delirious (with love), one of the Erotic Genii.
OSKI, hence one who listens to the wishes of mankind.
RADGRID, lit. seeking power with avidity; power, empire council.
RADSVITHR, wise, powerful.
RAGNAROKR. The n. ragin signified _rath_, council, the pl. of which,
regin, Is used in the Eddaic Poems for the gods; that is to say, the
consulting, deliberating deities. It answers in fact fully to the _E._
word _rack_, Indicating atmospheric nebulosity; hence Ragnarok is very
approp. rendered by "The Twilight of the Gods."
RAN, to plunder; her spoil being those who were drowned at sea.
RANDGRID: rand, from rond, a shield.
RATATOSKR, from the v. rata; to permeate; the last sylb. may be
derived from _G._ tasche, a pocket or pouch; hence the Permeating
Pouch?
REGIN, Is often used In the sense of vast, immense; the vast sea.
REGINLEIF, dear to the gods, _see_ Regin.
RIGR, Rajah, a king.
RINDA, prop. RINDUR, sig. symbolically, the crust of the earth.
ROSKA, quick, lively, active.
SADR, SATHR, just, true, in sooth, verily.
SÆGR, a large vessel of any kind. The word was used by the Skalds
metaphorically for the sea.
SAGA. The personified saga or narration, from the v. segja, to say;
_G._ sage; _E._ a saying; _L._ Saga, a sorceress; sagax, saga-clous,
to foretell.
SANNGETALL, inquiring after; guessing at truth.
SESSRUMNIR, lit. Seat-roomy, _i.e._ having room for plenty of seats.
SID, declining, hanging, tending downward.
SIDHOTTR, lit. Hanging-hat or hood.
SIDSKEGGR, lit. Hanging-beard; _E._ shag and shaggy.
SIF, signifying peace, friendship, relationship, a goddess, Sibja,
Sippia, and Sib.
SIGFADIR, or SIGFODUR, the Father of Victory; _L._ pater.
SILFRINTOPPR, Silver-mane; _E._ silver: toppr, _see_ Gulltoppr.
SINDRI, either scintillating or producing dross.
SJOFNA. F. Mag. derives it from the v. sja, to see.
SKADI, the magpie received its name from this goddess.
SKAFIDR, shaving, scraping.
SKEGGOLD, lit. Old-beard; also denoted a particular kind of
battle-axe.
SKEIDBRIMIR, any space of time that is elapsing.
SKIDBLADNIR, lath, shingle, billet of wood, a sheath; _E._ blade, a
blade or _leaf_ of grass.
SKILFINGR, prob. to shake, to shatter.
SKINFAXI, Shining-mane: skin, splendour, light.
SKIRNIR, serene, pure, clear; E. sheer, which had formerly the same
meaning.
SKOGUL, prob. from v. skaga, to jut out; whence skagi, a promontory.
SKOLL, to stick to, to adhere, to strike, to smite.
SLEIPNIR. _E._ slippery.
SLIDRUGTANNI, cruel, fierce, savage.
SNOTRA, to blow the nose; a person, even a goddess, being much more
_tidy_ when the nostrils are thoroughly _emunctated._
SOKKVABEKKR, lit. Sinking-brook; to sink; an estuary, a shore, a
brook.
SON, sound, song, _sonus_, _cantus_.
SURTUR, obscure, invisible; and invisible, unintelligible!! Surtur,
according to Fin Magnusen, the invisible, unintelligible being whom
the ancient Scandinavians regarded as "the great First Cause least
understood" of all things.
SVADILFARI, lubricity, also slippery ice.
SVAFNIR, prob. from v. svefa, to cast asleep; sleep, quiet, repose.
SVALINN, the Refrigerating; to cool, to refrigerate.
SVARTALFAHEIMR, lit. Black or Swart Elves' home, region of the Elves
of Darkness in contradistincition to that of the Elves of Light.
SVARTHOFDI, Black-head; svartr, black, swart.
SVASUTHR, Sweet-south; blithe, jocund, dear.
SVIDR and SVIDRIR, from v. svida, to scorch; or wise, powerful.
SVIPALL, to hasten, to vibrate; to wave, to hover; also with _E._ v.
to sweep.
SYLGR, a draught or deglutition; to swallow; to swill; to guzzle, to
feast.
SYN, signifying equity; syn. defence, excuse, negation, impediment,
which has been personified into a judicial goddess.
SYNIR, having a fine appearance.
TANNGNIOSTR, Gnashing-teeth; to bruise, crack, grind, gnash.
THEKKR, to know; _E._ to think. The adj. thekkr means also amiable.
THODNUMA, men, people, nations.
THOR, contraction of Thonar, a word indicating a God who, like Thor,
presided over _thunder_ and atmospherical phenomena.
THORINN, from thor, audacity; whence the v. thora; to dare.
THRAINN, the Pertinacious; from the v. thra, to desire vehemently.
THRIDI, _The Third_.
THROR, ph. from v. throa, to increase, to amplify.
THRUDUR. Thrudr is an obsolete _N._ word signifying fortitude,
firmness; but it appears to have originally had, in most of the
Teutonic languages the sig. of maiden, virgin; and was afterwards used
in the sense of witch, sorceress.
THRUDVANGR, the Abode or Region or Fortitude.
THRYM. F. Mag. says the word is _undoubtedly_ derived from thruma,
thunder.
THUNDR, can be derived from thund, a breastplate, a coat of mail.
THYN, to thunder, to make a thundering noise, as a rapid current does.
TYR, signifying God; as well as the _L._ Jupiter, for which he assumes
a nom. Ju or Jus, Jupiter.
URD, VERDANDI, and SKULD, the Present, Past, and Future. The names of
the Destinies of the Present and Past.
UTGARD, prop. UTGARDR, lit. Outer-ward. _See_ Midgard.
VAFTHRUDNIR, from the v. vefa, to involve, prop, to weave.
VAFUDR, the Weaver, or the Constrainer.
VAKR, VAKUR, alert, lively, vigilant.
VALASKJALF, choice, election.
VALFADIR, or VALFODUR, lit. the Choosing Father.
VALHALLA, prop, VALHOLL, lit. the Hall of the Chosen: may also have
originally indicated a temple.
VALKYRJOR, or VALKYRJUR, sing. VALKYRJA, lit. Choosers of the Slain;
denoted the slain in battle; a poetical word for a field of battle.
VANADIS, prop, a Goddess of the Vanir. _See_ that word, and _Dis_.
VANIR, beautiful; with the _L._ venustus and Venus, and ph. with the
_E. wench_.
VASADR, from vas, moisture, a word cog. with the _E._ wet and wash.
VE. Was used in the m. sing, to express a particular god; that in the
pi. it would be vear, gods, idols; a temple.
VEDURFOLNIR might be rendered Storm-stilling; causing serenity.
VEGSVINN, lit Road-knowing.
VERATYR, lit. the Man-god.
VESTRI, west, occidental.
VIDAR, a tree; wood; and prob. also weed and withy.
VIDBLAINN, expanded azure (lit. Wide-blue).
VIDFINNR, wide, vast.
VIDOLFR, or VIDALFR, lit. Sylvan Elf.
VIDRIR, Moderator of the weather; to still the weather.
VIGRID, from vig, a battle; battle craft, the art of war.
VILI, Will. To will; to choose; to elect.
VILMEITHR, an old word for tree.
VIN, and VINA, a friend, to love, to favour; winsome.
VINDALFR, Wind Elf.
VINDSVALR; vindr, wind: and svalr, cold, glacial.
VINGOLF, lit. the Abode of Friends; golf means lit. a floor.
VOLUNDR. The word denotes a skilful artificer, in which sense it is
still used by the Icelanders; he is a famous workman--a Wayland--in
iron; and they very appropriately term a labyrinth a Wayland-house.
VOLUSPA, a sybil or prophetess.
YGGDRASILL, from Ygg, one of Odin's names (see the following word) and
drasill, bearing; hence, according to F. Mag., it would sig. bearing
(producing) rain, or bearing Odin.
YGGR., to meditate, and also to fear; hence the word might be rendered
by either the Meditating or the Terrible.
YLG, the Howling; to howl.
YMIR, a confused noise, like the rustling of trees when shaken by the
wind; also the clang of metals.
(_after the painting of R. Bung._)
The story of Siegfried and Brynhild constitutes the greatest epic in
Teutonic Gothic literature. Its origin is hard to trace, but parts of
the legends carry the investigator back to Iranian sources. Its
greatest development, however, may justly be credited to Icelandic
sagas, in which the mythology of the Norse people has a prominent
place. In both the Gothic and Teutonic versions, while considerable
variation of incident is noticeable, the awakening of Brynhild, a
valkyrie maiden, and daughter of Wotan, is represented as having been
accomplished by Siegfried, who rides through a wall of flames which
surrounds her, and thus breaks the spell which binds her to sleep
until a warrior fearless enough to brave fire shall come to claim her
for a bride.
(_From a painting by Jno. Kellar._)
An admirable description of a feast of the gods, in Valhalla, will be
found on pages 293-94-95 of this volume. It was a strong belief among
the Goths, prior to the introduction of Christianity among them, that
the bodies of all warriors who met their deaths in battle were
transported directly to Valhalla by Valkyrie maidens on the backs of
winged horses. Upon reaching this mythological heaven the dead were
revived and ever thereafter enjoyed drinking mead, eating swine flesh,
and in fighting their battles over again every day.
(_From a painting by S. Goldberg._)
Atli has been identified as Attila, called in history "the Scourge of
God," a king of the Huns who twice defeated the Romans under
Theodosius, and plundered the eternal city itself. He was guilty of
many excesses and is reported to have died of a hemorrhage on the day
following his marriage with Ildico (453). In the story of Seigfried
and Brynhild, however, he is represented as having married Gudran,
daughter of Grimhild and King Giuki, who it will be recalled by
readers of the other volumes of this series, beguiled Siegfried by
means of a magic potion, into marriage with her. Her feelings revolted
against an alliance with Atli, but she accepted him for a husband in
order thereby to obtain the power to gratify her vengeance against
Hogni (Hagan), who had assassinated Siegfried.
and the Younger Eddas of Snorre Sturleson, by Saemund Sigfusson and Snorre Sturleson