Greek letters used to identify stars (Bayer designation), are replaced
with the full name of the Greek letter, e.g. Alpha Centauri.
The single Greek word in the text is transliterated within braces, {kome}.
Minor punctuation and hyphenation inconsistencies have been corrected.
The spelling "Bernices" for "Berenices" has been retained throughout.
The following minor typographical errors have been corrected:
p75:  "establish" changed to "established"
p99:  "Firmanent" changed to "Firmament"
p111: "they thoughts" changed to "thy thoughts"
p120: "suen" changed to "seuen"
p134: "consequenc" changed to "consequence"
p146: "geographieal" changed to "geographical"
p167: "Lyrae" changed to "Lyrae" for consistency
p286: Removed redundant word "degrees" following the degree symbol
_These are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Almighty! thine this universal frame,
Thus wondrous fair: Thyself how wondrous then!
Unspeakable._
A Typical Sun-spot                                        _Frontispiece_
Many able and cultured writers have delighted to expatiate on the
beauties of Milton's 'Paradise Lost,' and to linger with admiration over
the lofty utterances expressed in his poem. Though conscious of his
inability to do justice to the sublimest of poets and the noblest of
sciences, the author has ventured to contribute to Miltonic literature a
work which he hopes will prove to be of an interesting and instructive
character. Perhaps the choicest passages in the poem are associated with
astronomical allusion, and it is chiefly to the exposition and
illustration of these that this volume is devoted.
The writer is indebted to many authors for information and reference,
and especially to Miss Agnes M. Clerke, Professors Masson and Young, Mr.
James Nasmyth, Mr. G. F. Chambers, and Sir Robert Ball. Also to the
works of the late Mr. R. A. Proctor, Sirs W. and J. Herschel, Admiral
Smyth, Professor Grant, Mr. J. R. Hind, Sir David Brewster, Rev. A. B.
Whatton, and Prebendary Webb.
Most of the illustrations have been supplied by the Publishers: Messrs.
Macmillan and W. Hunt & Co. have kindly permitted the reproduction of
some of their drawings.
MANCHESTER, _March 1896_.
Astronomy is the oldest and most sublime of all the sciences. To a
contemplative observer of the heavens, the number and brilliancy of the
stars, the lustre of the planets, the silvery aspect of the Moon, with
her ever-changing phases, together with the order, the harmony, and
unison pervading them all, create in his mind thoughts of wonder and
admiration. Occupying the abyss of space indistinguishable from
infinity, the starry heavens in grandeur and magnificence surpass the
loftiest conceptions of the human mind; for, at a distance beyond the
range of ordinary vision, the telescope reveals clusters, systems,
galaxies, universes of stars--suns--the innumerable host of heaven, each
shining with a splendour comparable with that of our Sun, and, in all
likelihood, fulfilling in a similar manner the same beneficent purposes.
The time when man began to study the stars is lost in the antiquity of
prehistoric ages. The ancient inhabitants of the Earth regarded the
heavenly bodies with veneration and awe, erected temples in their
honour, and worshipped them as deities. Historical records of astronomy
carry us back several thousand years. During the greater part of this
time, and until a comparatively recent period, astronomy was associated
with astrology--a science which originated from a desire on the part of
mankind to penetrate the future, and which was based upon the supposed
influence of the heavenly bodies upon human and terrestrial affairs. It
was natural to imagine that the overruling power which governed and
directed the course of sublunary events resided in the heavens, and that
its decrees might be understood by watching the movements of the
heavenly bodies under its control. It was, therefore, believed that by
observing the configuration of the planets and the positions of the
constellations at the instant of the birth of an individual, his
horoscope, or destiny, could be foretold; and that by making
observations of a somewhat similar nature the occurrence of events of
public importance could be predicted. When, however, the laws which
govern the motions of the heavenly bodies became better known, and
especially after the discovery of the great law of gravitation,
astrology ceased to be a belief, though for long after it retained its
power over the imagination, and was often alluded to in the writings of
poets and other authors.
In the early dawn of astronomical science, the theories upheld with
regard to the structure of the heavens were of a simple and primitive
nature, and might even be described as grotesque. This need occasion no
surprise when we consider the difficulties with which ancient
astronomers had to contend in their endeavours to reduce to order and
harmony the complicated motions of the orbs which they beheld circling
around them.
The grouping of the stars into constellations having fanciful names,
derived from fable or ancient mythology, occurred at a very early
period, and though devoid of any methodical arrangement, is yet
sufficiently well-defined to serve the purposes of modern astronomers.
Several of the ancient nations of the earth, including the Chaldeans,
Egyptians, Hindus, and Chinese, claim to have been the earliest
astronomers. Chinese records of astronomy reveal an antiquity of near
possessed any scientific knowledge, and they merely record the
occurrence of solar eclipses and the appearances of comets.
It is not known when astronomy was first studied by the Egyptians; but
what astronomical information they have handed down is not of a very
intelligible kind, nor have they left behind any data that can be relied
upon. The Great Pyramid, judging from the exactness with which it faces
the cardinal points, must have been designed by persons who possessed a
good knowledge of astronomy, and it was probably made use of for
observational purposes.
It is now generally admitted that correct astronomical observations were
first made on the plains of Chaldea, records of eclipses having been
discovered in Chaldean cities which date back 2,234 years B.C. The
Chaldeans were true astronomers: they made correct observations of the
risings and settings of the heavenly bodies; and the exact orientation
of their temples and public buildings indicates the precision with which
they observed the positions of celestial objects. They invented the
zodiac and gnomon, made use of several kinds of dials, notified
eclipses, and divided the day into twenty-four hours.
To the Greeks belongs the credit of having first studied astronomy in a
regular and systematic manner. THALES (640 B.C.) was one of the earliest
of Greek astronomers, and may be regarded as the founder of the science
among that people. He was born at Miletus, and afterwards repaired to
Egypt for the purpose of study. On his return to Greece he founded the
Ionian school, and taught the sphericity of the Earth, the obliquity of
the ecliptic, and the true causes of eclipses of the Sun and Moon. He
also directed the attention of mariners to the superiority of the Lesser
Bear, as a guide for the navigation of vessels, as compared with the
Great Bear, by which constellation they usually steered. Thales believed
the Earth to be the centre of the universe, and that the stars were
composed of fire; he also predicted the occurrence of a great solar
eclipse.
Thales had for his successors Anaximander, Anaximenes, and Anaxagoras,
who taught the doctrines of the Ionian school.
The next great astronomer that we read of is PYTHAGORAS, who was born at
Samos 590 B.C. He studied under Thales, and afterwards visited Egypt and
India, in order that he might make himself familiar with the scientific
theories adopted by those nations. On his return to Europe he founded
his school in Italy, and taught in a more extended form the doctrines of
the Ionian school. In his speculations with regard to the structure of
the universe he propounded the theory (though the reasons by which he
sustained it were fanciful) that the Sun is the centre of the planetary
system, and that the Earth revolves round him. This theory--the accuracy
of which has since been confirmed--received but little attention from
his successors, and it sank into oblivion until the time of Copernicus,
by whom it was revived. Pythagoras discovered that the Morning and
Evening Stars are one and the same planet.
Among the famous astronomers who lived about this period we find
recorded the names of Meton, who introduced the Metonic cycle into
Greece and erected the first sundial at Athens; Eudoxus, who persuaded
the Greeks to adopt the year of 365-1/4 days; and Nicetas, who taught
that the Earth completed a daily revolution on her axis.
The Alexandrian school, which flourished for three centuries prior to
the Christian era, produced men of eminence whose discoveries and
investigations, when arranged and classified, enabled astronomy to be
regarded as a true theoretical science. The positions of the fixed stars
and the paths of the planets were determined with greater accuracy, and
irregularities of the motions of the Sun and Moon were investigated with
greater precision. Attempts were made to ascertain the distance of the
Sun from the Earth, and also the dimensions of the terrestrial sphere.
The obliquity of the ecliptic was accurately determined, and an arc of
the meridian was measured between Syene and Alexandria. The names of
Aristarchus, Eratosthenes, Aristyllus, Timocharis, and Autolycus, are
familiarly known in association with the advancement of the astronomy of
this period.
We now reach the name of HIPPARCHUS of Bithynia (140 B.C.), the most
illustrious astronomer of antiquity, who did much to raise astronomy to
the position of a true science, and who has also left behind him ample
evidence of his genius 'as a mathematician, an observer, and a
theorist.' We are indebted to him for the earliest star catalogue, in
which he included 1,081 stars. He discovered the Precession of the
Equinoxes, and determined the motions of the Sun and Moon, and also the
length of the year, with greater precision than any of his predecessors.
He invented the sciences of plane and spherical trigonometry, and was
the first to use right ascensions and declinations.
The next astronomer of eminence after Hipparchus was PTOLEMY (130 A.D.),
who resided at Alexandria. He was skilled as a mathematician and
geographer, and also excelled as a musician. His chief discovery was an
irregularity of the lunar motion, called the '_evection_.' He was also
the first to observe the effect of the refraction of light in causing
the apparent displacement of a heavenly body from its true position.
Ptolemy devoted much of his time to extending and improving the theories
of Hipparchus, and compiled a great treatise, called the 'Almagest,'
which contains nearly all the knowledge we possess of ancient astronomy.
Ptolemy's name is, however, most widely known in association with what
is called the Ptolemaic theory. This system, which originated long
before his time, but of which he was one of the ablest expounders, was
an attempt to establish on a scientific basis the conclusions and
results arrived at by early astronomers who studied and observed the
motions of the heavenly bodies. Ptolemy regarded the Earth as the
immovable centre of the universe, round which the Sun, Moon, planets,
and the entire heavens completed a daily revolution in twenty-four
hours. After the death of Ptolemy no worthy successor was found to
occupy his place, the study of astronomy began to decline among the
Greeks, and after a time it ceased to be cultivated by that people.
The Arabs next took up the study of astronomy, which they prosecuted
most assiduously for a period of four centuries. Their labours were,
however, confined chiefly to observational work, in which they
excelled; unlike their predecessors, they paid but little attention to
speculative theories--indeed, they regarded with such veneration the
opinions held by the Greeks, that they did not feel disposed to question
the accuracy of their doctrines. The most eminent astronomer among the
Arabs was ALBATEGNIUS (680 A.D.). He corrected the Greek observations,
and made several discoveries which testified to his abilities as an
observer. IBN YUNIS and ABUL WEFU were Arab astronomers who earned a
high reputation on account of the number and accuracy of their
observations. In Persia, a descendant of the famous Genghis Khan erected
an observatory, where astronomical observations were systematically
made. Omar, a Persian astronomer, suggested a reformation of the
calendar which, if it had been adopted, would have insured greater
accuracy than can be attained by the Gregorian style now in use. In
constructed a star catalogue of greater exactness than was known to
exist prior to his time. The Arabs may be regarded as having been the
custodians of astronomy until the time of its revival in another quarter
of the Globe.
After the lapse of many centuries, astronomy was introduced into Western
Europe in 1220, and from that date to the present time its career has
been one of triumphant progress. In 1230, a translation of Ptolemy's
'Almagest' from Arabic into Latin was accomplished by order of the
German Emperor, Frederick II.; and in 1252 Alphonso X., King of Castile,
himself a zealous patron of astronomy, caused a new set of astronomical
tables to be constructed at his own expense, which, in honour of his
Majesty, were called the 'Alphonsine Tables.' Purbach and Regiomontanus,
two German astronomers of distinguished reputation, and Waltherus, a man
of considerable renown, made many important observations in the
fifteenth century.
The most eminent astronomer who lived during the latter part of this
century was Copernicus. NICOLAS COPERNICUS was born February 19, 1473,
at Thorn, a small town situated on the Vistula, which formed the
boundary between the kingdoms of Prussia and Poland. His father was a
Polish subject, and his mother of German extraction. Having lost his
parents early in life, he was educated under the supervision of his
uncle Lucas, Bishop of Ermland. Copernicus attended a school at Thorn,
and afterwards entered the University of Cracow, in 1491, where he
devoted four years to the study of mathematics and science. On leaving
Cracow he attached himself to the University of Bologna as a student of
canon law, and attended a course of lectures on astronomy given by
Novarra. In the ensuing year he was appointed canon of Frauenburg, the
cathedral city of the Diocese of Ermland, situated on the shores of the
Frisches Haff. In the year 1500 he was at Rome, where he lectured on
mathematics and astronomy. He next spent a few years at the University
of Padua, where, besides applying himself to mathematics and astronomy,
he studied medicine and obtained a degree. In 1505 Copernicus returned
to his native country, and was appointed medical attendant to his uncle,
the Bishop of Ermland, with whom he resided in the stately castle of
Heilsberg, situated at a distance of forty-six miles from Frauenburg.
Copernicus lived with his uncle from 1507 till 1512, and during that
time prosecuted his astronomical studies, and undertook, besides, many
arduous duties associated with the administration of the diocese; these
he faithfully discharged until the death of the Bishop, which occurred
in 1512. After the death of his uncle he took up his residence at
Frauenburg, where he occupied his time in meditating on his new
astronomy and undertaking various duties of a public character, which he
fulfilled with credit and distinction. In 1523 he was appointed
Administrator-General of the diocese. Though a canon of Frauenburg,
Copernicus never became a priest.
After many years of profound meditation and thought, Copernicus, in a
treatise entitled 'De Revolutionibus Orbium Celestium,' propounded a new
theory, or, more correctly speaking, revived the ancient Pythagorean
system of the universe. This great work, which he dedicated to Pope Paul
III., was completed in 1530; but he could not be prevailed upon to have
it published until 1543, the year in which he died. In 1542 Copernicus
had an apoplectic seizure, followed by paralysis and a gradual decay of
his mental and vital powers. His book was printed at Nuremberg, and the
first copy arrived at Frauenburg on May 24, 1543, in time to be touched
by the hands of the dying man, who in a few hours after expired. The
house in which Copernicus lived at Allenstein is still in existence, and
in the walls of his chamber are visible the perforations which he made
for the purpose of observing the stars cross the meridian.
Copernicus was the means of creating an entire revolution in the science
of astronomy, by transferring the centre of our system from the Earth to
the Sun. He accounted for the alternation of day and night by the
rotation of the Earth on her axis, and for the vicissitudes of the
seasons by her revolution round the Sun. He devoted the greater part of
his life to meditating on this theory, and adduced several weighty
reasons in its support. Copernicus could not help perceiving the
complications and entanglements by which the Ptolemaic system of the
universe was surrounded, and which compared unfavourably with the simple
and orderly manner in which other natural phenomena presented themselves
to his observation. By perceiving that Mars when in opposition was not
much inferior in lustre to Jupiter, and when in conjunction resembled a
star of the second magnitude, he arrived at the conclusion that the
Earth could not be the centre of the planet's motion. Having discovered
in some ancient manuscripts a theory, ascribed to the Egyptians, that
Mercury and Venus revolved round the Sun, whilst they accompanied the
orb in his revolution round the Earth, Copernicus was able to perceive
that this afforded him a means of explaining the alternate appearance of
those planets on each side of the Sun. The varied aspects of the
superior planets, when observed in different parts of their orbits, also
led him to conclude that the Earth was not the central body round which
they accomplished their revolutions. As a combined result of his
observation and reasoning Copernicus propounded the theory that the Sun
is the centre of our system, and that all the planets, including the
Earth, revolve in orbits around him. This, which is called the
Copernican system, is now regarded as, and has been proved to be, the
true theory of the solar system.
TYCHO BRAHE was a celebrated Danish astronomer, who earned a deservedly
high reputation on account of the number and accuracy of his
astronomical observations and calculations. The various astronomical
tables that were in use in his time contained many inaccuracies, and it
became necessary that they should be reconstructed upon a more correct
basis. Tycho possessed the practical skill required for this kind of
work.
He was born December 14, 1546, at Knudstorp, near Helsingborg. His
father, Otto Brahe, traced his descent from a Swedish family of noble
birth. At the age of thirteen Tycho was sent to the University of
Copenhagen, where it was intended he should prepare himself for the
study of the law.
The prediction of a great solar eclipse, which was to happen on August
such phenomena were regarded as portending the occurrence of events of
national importance. Tycho looked forward with great eagerness to the
time of the eclipse. He watched its progress with intense interest, and
when he perceived all the details of the phenomenon occur exactly as
they were predicted, he resolved to pursue the study of a science by
which, as was then believed, the occurrence of future events could be
foretold. From Copenhagen Tycho Brahe was sent to Leipsic to study
jurisprudence, but astronomy absorbed all his thoughts. He spent his
pocket-money in purchasing astronomical books, and, when his tutor had
retired to sleep, he occupied his time night after night in watching the
stars and making himself familiar with their courses. He followed the
planets in their direct and retrograde movements, and with the aid of a
small globe and pair of compasses was able by means of his own
calculations to detect serious discrepancies in the Alphonsine and
Prutenic tables. In order to make himself more proficient in calculating
astronomical tables he studied arithmetic and geometry, and learned
mathematics without the aid of a master. Having remained at Leipsic for
three years, during which time he paid far more attention to the study
of astronomy than to that of law, he returned to his native country in
consequence of the death of an uncle, who bequeathed him a considerable
estate. In Denmark he continued to prosecute his astronomical studies,
and incurred the displeasure of his friends, who blamed him for
neglecting his intended profession and wasting his time on astronomy,
which they regarded as useless and unprofitable.
Not caring to remain among his relatives, Tycho Brahe returned to
Germany, and arrived at Wittenberg in 1566. Whilst residing here he had
an altercation with a Danish gentleman over some question in
mathematics. The quarrel led to a duel with swords, which terminated
rather unfortunately for Tycho, who had a portion of his nose cut off.
This loss he repaired by ingeniously contriving one of gold, silver, and
wax, which was said to bear a good resemblance to the original. From
Wittenberg Tycho proceeded to Augsburg, where he resided for two years.
Here he made the acquaintance of several men distinguished for their
learning and their love of astronomy. During his stay at Augsburg he
constructed a quadrant of fourteen cubits radius, on which were
indicated the single minutes of a degree; he made many valuable
observations with this instrument, which he used in combination with a
large sextant.
In 1571 Tycho returned to Denmark, where his fame as an astronomer had
preceded him, and was the means of procuring for him a hearty welcome
from his relatives and friends. In 1572, when returning one night from
his laboratory--for Tycho studied alchemy as well as astronomy--he
beheld what appeared to be a new and brilliant star in the
constellation Cassiopeia, which was situated overhead. He directed the
attention of his companions to this wonderful object, and all declared
that they had never observed such a star before. On the following night
he measured its distance from the nearest stars in the constellation,
and arrived at the conclusion that it was a fixed star, and beyond our
system.
This remarkable object remained visible for sixteen months, and when at
its brightest rivalled Sirius. At first it was of a brilliant white
colour, but as it diminished in size it became yellow; it next changed
to a red colour, resembling Aldebaran; afterwards it appeared like
Saturn, and as it grew smaller it decreased in brightness, until it
finally became invisible. In 1573 Tycho Brahe married a peasant-girl
from the village of Knudstorp. This imprudent act roused the resentment
of his relatives, who, being of noble birth, were indignant that he
should have contracted such an alliance. The bitterness and mutual
ill-feeling created by this affair became so intense that the King of
Denmark deemed it advisable to endeavour to bring about a
reconciliation.
After this Tycho returned to Germany, and visited several cities before
deciding where he should take up his permanent residence.
His fame as an astronomer was now so great that he was received with
distinction wherever he went, and on the occasion of a visit to
Hesse-Cassel he spent a few pleasant days with William, Landgrave of
Hesse, who was himself skilled in astronomy.
Frederick II., King of Denmark, having recognised Tycho Brahe's great
merits as an astronomer, and not wishing that his fame should add lustre
to a foreign Court, expressed a desire that he should return to his
native country, and as an inducement offered him a life interest in the
island of Huen, in the Sound, where he undertook to erect and equip an
observatory at his own expense; the King also promised to bestow upon
him a pension, and grant him other emoluments besides.
Tycho gladly accepted this generous offer, and during the construction
of the observatory occupied his time in making a magnificent collection
of instruments and appliances adapted for observational purposes. This
handsome edifice, upon which the King of Denmark expended a sum of
Here Tycho resided for a period of twenty years, during which time he
pursued his astronomical labours with untiring energy and zeal, and made
a large number of observations and calculations of much superior
accuracy to any that existed previously, which were afterwards of great
service to his successors. During his long residence at Huen, Tycho was
visited by many distinguished persons, who were attracted to his island
home by his fame and the magnificence of his observatory. Among them was
James VI. of Scotland, who, whilst journeying to the Court of Denmark
on the occasion of his marriage to a Danish princess, paid Tycho a
visit, and enjoyed his hospitality for a week. The King was delighted
with all that he saw, and on his departure presented Tycho with a
handsome donation, and at his request composed some Latin verses, in
which he eulogised his host and praised his observatory.
The island of Huen is situated about six miles from the coast of
Zealand, and fourteen from Copenhagen. It has a circumference of six
miles, and consists chiefly of an elevated plateau, in the centre of
which Tycho erected his observatory, the site of which is now marked by
two pits and a few mounds of earth--all that remains of Uranienburg. All
went well with Tycho Brahe during the lifetime of his noble patron; but
in 1588 Frederick II. died, and was succeeded by his son, a youth eleven
years of age.
The Danish nobles had long been jealous of Tycho's fame and reputation,
and on the death of the King an opportunity was afforded them of
intriguing with the object of accomplishing his downfall. Several false
accusations were brought against him, and the Court party made the
impoverished state of the Treasury an excuse for depriving him of his
pension and emoluments granted by the late King.
Tycho was no longer able to bear the expense of maintaining his
establishment at Huen, and fearing that he might be deprived of the
island itself, he took a house in Copenhagen, to which he removed all
his smaller instruments.
During his residence in the capital he was subjected to annoyance and
persecution. An order was issued in the King's name preventing him from
carrying on his chemical experiments, and he besides suffered the
indignity of a personal assault. Tycho Brahe resolved to quit his
ungrateful country and seek a home in some foreign land, where he should
be permitted to pursue his studies unmolested and live in quietness and
peace. He accordingly removed from the island of Huen all his
instruments and appliances that were of a portable nature, and packed
them on board a vessel which he hired for the purpose of transport, and,
having embarked with his family, his servants, and some of his pupils
and assistants, 'this interesting barque, freighted with the glory of
Denmark,' set sail from Copenhagen about the end of 1597, and having
crossed the Baltic in safety, arrived at Rostock, where Tycho found some
old friends waiting to receive him. He was now in doubt as to where he
should find a home, when the Austrian Emperor Rudolph, himself a liberal
patron of science and the fine arts, having heard of Tycho Brahe's
misfortunes, sent him an invitation to take up his abode in his
dominions, and promised that he should be treated in a manner worthy of
his reputation and fame.
Tycho resolved to accept the Emperor's kind invitation, and in the
spring of 1599 arrived at Prague, where he found a handsome residence
prepared for his reception.
He was received by the Emperor in a most cordial manner and treated with
the greatest kindness. An annual pension of three thousand crowns was
settled upon him for life, and he was to have his choice of several
residences belonging to his Majesty, where he might reside and erect a
new observatory. From among these he selected the Castle of Benach, in
Bohemia, which was situated on an elevated plateau and commanded a wide
view of the horizon.
During his residence at Benach Tycho received a visit from Kepler, who
stayed with him for several months in order that he might carry out some
astronomical observations. In the following year Kepler returned, and
took up his permanent residence with Tycho, having been appointed
assistant in his observatory, a post which, at Tycho's request, was
conferred upon him by the Emperor.
Tycho Brahe soon discovered that his ignorance of the language and
unfamiliarity with the customs of the people caused him much
inconvenience. He therefore asked permission from the Emperor to be
allowed to remove to Prague. This request was readily granted, and a
suitable residence was provided for him in the city.
In the meantime his family, his large instruments, and other property,
having arrived at Prague, Tycho was soon comfortably settled in his new
home.
Though Tycho Brahe continued his astronomical observations, yet he could
not help feeling that he lived among a strange people; nor did the
remembrance of his sufferings and the cruel treatment he received at the
hands of his fellow-countrymen subdue the affection which he cherished
towards his native land. Pondering over the past, he became despondent
and low-spirited; a morbid imagination caused him to brood over small
troubles, and gloomy, melancholy thoughts possessed his mind--symptoms
which seemed to presage the approach of some serious malady. One
evening, when visiting at the house of a friend, he was seized with a
painful illness, to which he succumbed in less than a fortnight. He died
at Prague on October 24, 1601, when in his fifty-fifth year.
The Emperor Rudolph, when informed of Tycho Brahe's death, expressed his
deep regret, and commanded that he should be interred in the principal
church in the city, and that his obsequies should be celebrated with
every mark of honour and respect.
Tycho Brahe stands out as the most romantic and prominent figure in the
history of astronomy. His independence of character, his ardent
attachments, his strong hatreds, and his love of splendour, are
characteristics which distinguish him from all other men of his age.
This remarkable man was an astronomer, astrologer, and alchemist; but in
his latter years he renounced astrology, and believed that the stars
exercised no influence over the destinies of mankind.
As a practical astronomer, Tycho Brahe has not been excelled by any
other observer of the heavens. The magnificence of his observatory at
Huen, upon the equipment and embellishment of which it is stated he
expended a ton of gold; the splendour and variety of his instruments,
and his ingenuity in inventing new ones, would alone have made him
famous. But it was by the skill and assiduity with which he carried out
his numerous and important observations that he has earned for himself a
position of the most honourable distinction among astronomers. In his
investigation of the Lunar theory Tycho Brahe discovered the Moon's