Selected and Edited by
With an Introduction by
Minister of Education for the
Province of Ontario
Printed by Order of
The Legislative Assembly of Ontario
Printed and Published by A. T. WILGRESS, Printer to the
King's Most Excellent Majesty
Additional copies of this book may be obtained from the Department of
Education, Parliament Buildings, Toronto, for twenty cents each.
Extract from Speech                     Churchill, Rt. Hon.
Telegram from King Albert to King
"A Scrap of Paper"                      Lloyd George, Rt. Hon.
Extract from Lecture "How We
From Speech at the Guildhall            Borden, Rt. Hon. Sir
From "Fear God and Take Your Own
To the Memory of Field-Marshal
Verdun                                  Lloyd George, Rt. Hon.
From Speech on Becoming Premier         Lloyd George, Rt. Hon.
Silent Toast, The                       Scott, Frederick
Extract from Speech in Toronto          Balfour, Rt. Hon.
Extract from Speech on Third
Anniversary of Declaration of War   Lloyd George, Rt.
Historic Order, An                      Haig, Field-Marshal
Speech Delivered before August
Order to the Canadians after the
On the Navy                             Churchill, Rt. Hon.
Extract from Official Report            Haig, Field-Marshal
National Anthem                                                  160
The selections contained in this book make up a sequence which records
the history of the Great War from the stirring days of August, 1914, to
the opening of the Peace Conference in January, 1919. These selections
of verse and prose are arranged, not necessarily in chronological
order, but still with a view to indicate approximately the historic
succession of great events and the varying moods of those authors and
speakers who have been the voices of the allied nations during the
fifty-two months of warfare.
Although this anthology has been prepared for the use of schools, the
plan of selection and arrangement has made it impracticable to grade
the poems and extracts to suit the capacities of pupils of different
ages. The judgment of the teacher must determine what is suitable for
one grade and what for another. Many of the poems and some of the prose
extracts will be found too difficult for young pupils.
Due acknowledgments have been made throughout the book to the authors
and publishers who have generously made it possible to bring together
so valuable a collection of the literature of the War. The meed
of gratitude due to all the writers represented here can never be
adequately paid. Special mention is made of Nizamat Jung, Native
Judge of the High Court of Hyderabad, who has given expression to the
wonderful loyalty of the races of teeming India, which have poured out
treasure and blood without stint in defence of their Emperor-King.
_A sufficient number of copies of this book should be kept in all
school libraries; and it is suggested that the poems and prose extracts
should be used in the reading classes, as often as is expedient,
instead of the authorized Readers._
The boys and girls of this generation have had the opportunity and
responsibility of living through great times. In days to come they
will look back with a feeling akin to awe on the hours when, in Sir
Owen Seaman's words, they "saw the Powers of Darkness put to flight"
and "saw the morning break." The future of our country will be
determined by the youth of to-day. Problems of the greatest complexity
and perplexity await solution, and can be solved only by honesty,
intelligence, sympathy, breadth of outlook, sacrificial service, and
the fear of God. The teachers and pupils now in our schools are in the
midst of a great crisis, and will need greatness of soul that they may
rightly face it. That they will respond nobly to the challenge of the
age, I have not the shadow of a doubt.
Never was there a more timely occasion for the teaching of an ardent
and enlightened patriotism. Those who understand the issues at stake in
the Great War, the genius of the world-wide British Commonwealth, the
national consciousness of our own fair Canada, the lessons taught us by
the mighty struggle, will be well-instructed citizens of this Dominion,
equipped by knowledge and by spirit to serve their country, their
Empire, and the world.
The selections of Verse and Prose in this book set forth the varying
and successive phases of the War, and seek to remind, to inform, and to
inspire. The teachers will use them as vehicles of moral and patriotic
instruction. The pupils will keep them forever in their hearts and
minds. Surely if we wish to introduce any good element into the life of
a nation, it can best be introduced through its schools and colleges.
It is well to recall the issues that have been decided; for in no
struggle have greater hung in the balance. The crime perpetrated
against the Belgians, aggravated by its accompanying treachery and
brutality and immediately followed by unparalleled sanguinary atrocity,
revealed as by a lurid flash the nature and the greatness of the menace
to which Christian civilization was exposed. Prussian militarism, in
this belated, almost incredible but all too terrible, outbreak of
Pagan barbarism, threatened to overthrow all the best elements in
international life.
(1) The very idea of a Commonwealth of Europe, the growing sense of
solidarity, the recognition of general interests, the existence of
international institutions such as the Hague Tribunal--were seen to be
doomed, if Germany should come forth a victor.
(2) The law of international good faith,--the absolutely indispensable
foundation for any international fabric,--would be abolished, if a
single criminal state could defy it with impunity, and could profitably
disregard treaties, oaths, Geneva Conventions, Hague Declarations, if
these interfered with its own selfish advantage.
(3) The fate of the smaller States of Europe, with their own special
contributions to civilization, would be sealed, if the arrogant
_Kultur_ of Germany were forced upon a subjugated world.
(4) The principle of nationality, vital to a stable and organic modern
state, would be crushed or remain as a source of constant unrest in
Austro-Hungary, in the Balkan Peninsula, and in other disturbed parts
of Europe.
(5) Democracy, with all it implies of self-government, freedom from
external compulsion, peaceful development, and civic progress,
was recognized as having come to deathgrips with its ancient
foe--militaristic autocracy.
(6) The future development of all the Free States of the world, the
Entente Powers and the neutrals, was threatened by the German blow
for world-power. The very existence of the British Empire as a free,
prosperous, and progressive commonwealth, was imperilled. The freedom
of our own Dominion was assailed.
(7) Behind all political and material interests, profound moral issues
were at stake. The struggle was against the "armed doctrine,"--that
diabolical perversion of all sound political thinking,--that the
essence of the State is might, that the State is above all moral
restraints, that war is its normal and noblest activity, and that war
may be waged with pitiless ferocity and scientific frightfulness.
All the forces that opposed freedom, self-government, and progress
gathered around the despotisms of Central Europe. In 1914 they made
their bid for world dominion. Never before had so much been at stake;
perhaps never again will such issues be put to the test. Thank God, the
judgment has been given; the righteous government of the world has been
vindicated; Right has triumphed over Might.
Gradually the real nature of the struggle was recognized by the free
peoples of the world. Their sons felt they were summoned to a new
crusade. They went forth as champions of democracy against autocracy,
of freedom against tyranny, of mercy against ruthlessness, of justice
against iniquity, of decency against shamefulness, of good faith
against perfidy, of Right against Might, of peace against war, of
humane and Christian civilization against savage and pagan barbarism.
All the world was presently forced to give a moral and political
judgment on the issues.
Our own glorious British Empire, with its traditions of justice,
honour, and liberty, soon became the soul and centre of the Allied
resistance. By her Fleet, by her Armies, by her aircraft, by her
financing, by her supplies, by her indomitable spirit--she endured
and smote the foe. We pay grateful tribute to the achievements of all
our Allies in the common cause; but we do not forget Britain's mighty
burden.
Among the British Armies, no troops have won higher distinction than
the Canadian Corps, under their great leader, Sir Arthur Currie. They
were ranked among the most formidable fighting units on the Western
Front, and as an offensive spear-head of shock troops they were
unsurpassed. They fought in almost every critical engagement of the
War. They "saved the day" at the second Battle of Ypres, in face of the
hideous emission of poison gas; they fought in the long-drawn agony of
the Somme; they won Vimy Ridge, Hill 70, and Passchendaele in 1917;
they were in the thickest of the battle in the last "hundred days", as
they fought triumphantly at Amiens, Arras, Cambrai, Valenciennes, and
Mons. The last blow struck before the Armistice was signed, was struck
by the Canadians, who entered Mons early on the morning of the eleventh
of November. The course of the war for the British Armies on the
Western Front was _from Mons_, where the "Old Contemptibles" were flung
into the furnace of the fight in August, 1914, _to Mons_, won by our
men from overseas in November, 1918. It was "a long, long way", a way
stained by blood and sweat, but at last the grim journey ended. Canada
has made a worthy contribution to world-freedom and world-brotherhood.
Canada is dearer to us than ever, because it has been purchased anew
at a great cost of precious blood. Those who have fallen are worthy of
everlasting remembrance. They will be commemorated by public monuments,
by tablets of bronze, or brass or marble in public buildings, by
"storied windows richly dight". They deserve this. But, before God,
they deserve at our hands a better monument--even the monument of
a purer, nobler Canada, more intelligent, more united, more sober,
more kindly, more God-fearing. Dying for Canada, they have recreated
Canada. Let us be worthy of those whose deaths have kept us free.
Through the experiences of these recent years, we have learned the
possibilities of heroism latent in every man. We need not hesitate to
make high demands on our citizens for worthy ends. We have regained
a right sense of the relative value of things, and we know that the
first things are those which are ideal, spiritual, eternal. We know
that persons are of infinitely more value than things; that the
development and enrichment of personality mark the only true advance
in civilization; and that the basis of national progress is the
health, efficiency, and spiritual well-being of the people. We have
realized the power of organized effort. We shall not forget the bonds
of sympathy which common sorrows have created. We have gained a wider
outlook on the world and a truer conception of the meaning of Empire.
We understand more clearly the national problems that lie before us
in this new era. A better Canada will not come of itself. It must be
planned for and striven for. But it will come, if there is kindled in
the souls of our citizens the same flame of sacrifice and service which
burned so brightly in the hearts of Canada's citizen-soldiers of the
Great War.
For all we have and are,
For all our children's fate,
Stand up and meet the war.
The Hun is at the gate!
Our world has passed away
In wantonness o'erthrown.
There is nothing left to-day
But steel and fire and stone.
Though all we knew depart,
The old commandments stand:
"In courage keep your heart,
In strength lift up your hand."
Once more we hear the word
That sickened earth of old:
"No law except the sword
Unsheathed and uncontrolled,"
Once more it knits mankind,
Once more the nations go
To meet and break and bind
A crazed and driven foe.
Comfort, content, delight--
The ages' slow-bought gain--
They shrivelled in a night.
Only ourselves remain
To face the naked days
In silent fortitude,
Through perils and dismays
Renewed and re-renewed.
Though all we made depart,
The old commandments stand:
"In patience keep your heart,
In strength lift up your hand."
No easy hopes or lies
Shall bring us to our goal,
But iron sacrifice
Of body, will, and soul.
There is but one task for all--
For each one life to give.
Who stands if freedom fall?
Who dies if England live?
_By permission of the Author_
(_August, 1914_)
You are ordered abroad as a soldier of the King to help our French
comrades against the invasion of a common enemy. You have to perform a
task which will need your courage, your energy, your patience. Remember
that the honour of the British Army depends on your individual conduct.
It will be your duty, not only to set an example of discipline and
perfect steadiness under fire, but also to maintain the most friendly
relations with those whom you are helping in this struggle. The
operations in which you are engaged will, for the most part, take
place in a friendly country, and you can do your own country no better
service than in showing yourself in France and Belgium in the true
character of a British soldier.
Be invariably courteous, considerate, and kind. Never do anything
likely to injure or destroy property, and always look upon looting as a
disgraceful act. You are sure to meet with a welcome and to be trusted;
your conduct must justify that welcome and that trust.
Your duty cannot be done unless your health is sound. So keep
constantly on your guard against any excesses. In this new experience
you may find temptations both in wine and women. You must entirely
resist both temptations, and, while treating all women with perfect
courtesy, you should avoid any intimacy.
Do your duty bravely. Fear God. Honour the King.
KITCHENER, _Field-Marshal_
England, in this great fight to which you go
Because, where Honour calls you, go you must,
Be glad, whatever comes, at least to know
You have your quarrel just.
Peace was your care; before the nations' bar
Her cause you pleaded and her ends you sought;
But not for her sake, being what you are,
Could you be bribed or bought.
Others may spurn the pledge of land to land,
May with the brute sword stain a gallant past;
But by the seal to which _you_ set your hand,
Thank God, you still stand fast!
Forth, then, to front that peril of the deep
With smiling lips and in your eyes the light,
Steadfast and confident, of those who keep
Their storied scutcheon bright.
And we, whose burden is to watch and wait--
High-hearted ever, strong in faith and prayer,
We ask what offering we may consecrate,
What humble service share?
To steel our souls against the lust of ease;
To find our welfare in the general good;
To hold together, merging all degrees
In one wide brotherhood;--
To teach that he who saves himself is lost;
To bear in silence though our hearts may bleed;
To spend ourselves, and never count the cost,
For others' greater need;--
To go our quiet ways, subdued and sane;
To hush all vulgar clamour of the street;
With level calm to face alike the strain
Of triumph or defeat;--
This be our part, for so we serve you best,
So best confirm their prowess and their pride,
Your warrior sons, to whom in this high test
Our fortunes we confide.
_Reprinted by permission of London "Punch"_
(_House of Lords, August 25, 1914_)
My Lords, as this is the first time I have had the honour of addressing
your Lordships, I must ask for the indulgence of the House. In the
first place, I desire to make a personal statement. Noble Lords on both
sides of the House doubtless know that while associating myself in the
fullest degree for the prosecution of the war with my colleagues in
His Majesty's Government, my position on this bench does not in any
way imply that I belong to any political party, for, as a soldier, I
have no politics. Another point is that my occupation of the post of
Secretary of State for War is a temporary one. The terms of my service
are the same as those under which some of the finest portions of
our manhood, now so willingly stepping forward to join the colours,
are engaging--that is to say, for the war, or, if it lasts longer
than three years, then for three years. It has been asked why this
latter limit has been fixed. It is because that should this disastrous
war be prolonged--and no one can foretell with any certainty its
duration--then after three years' war there will be others fresh and
fully prepared to take our places and see this matter through.
The very serious conflict in which we are now engaged on the Continent
has been none of our seeking. It will undoubtedly strain the resources
of our Empire and entail considerable sacrifices on our people. These
will be willingly borne for our honour and for the preservation of
our position in the world; and they will be shared by our Dominions
beyond the seas, now sending contingents and assistance of every kind
to help the Mother Country in this struggle. If I am unable, owing to
military considerations for the best interests of the Allied Armies in
the field, to speak with much detail on the present situation of our
Army on the Continent, I am sure your Lordships will pardon me for the
necessary restraint which is imposed upon me.
The Expeditionary Force has taken the field on the French North-West
frontier, and advanced to the neighbourhood of Mons in Belgium.
Our troops have already been for thirty-six hours in contact with
a superior force of German invaders. During that time they have
maintained the traditions of British soldiers, and have behaved with
the utmost gallantry.
You that have faith to look with fearless eyes
Beyond the tragedy of a world at strife,
And trust that out of night and death shall rise
The dawn of ampler life;
Rejoice, whatever anguish rend your heart,
That God has given you, for a priceless dower,
To live in these great times and have your part
In Freedom's crowning hour;
That you may tell your sons who see the light
High in the heavens, their heritage to take:--
"I saw the powers of darkness put to flight!
I saw the morning break!"
_By permission of the Author_
(This poem was first published before 1914, but during the
Great War it was very widely quoted, the refrain voicing the
spirit of England.)
ENGLAND! where the sacred flame
Burns before the inmost shrine,
Where the lips that love thy name
Consecrate their hopes and thine,
Where the banners of thy dead
Weave their shadows overhead,
Watch beside thine arms to-night,
Pray that God defend the Right.
Think that when to-morrow comes
War shall claim command of all,
Thou must hear the roll of drums,
Thou must hear the trumpet's call.
Now before they silence ruth,
Commune with the voice of truth;
England! on thy knees to-night
Pray that God defend the Right.
Hast thou counted up the cost,
What to foeman, what to friend?
Glory sought is Honour lost,
How should this be knighthood's end?
Know'st thou what is Hatred's meed?
What the surest gain of Greed?
England! wilt thou dare to-night
Pray that God defend the Right?
Single-hearted, unafraid,
Hither all thy heroes came,
On this altar's steps were laid
Gordon's life and Outram's fame.
England! if thy will be yet
By their great example set,
Here beside thine arms to-night
Pray that God defend the Right.
So shalt thou when morning comes
Rise to conquer or to fall,
Joyful hear the rolling drums,
Joyful hear the trumpets call.
Then let Memory tell thy heart;
"_England! what thou wert, thou art!_"
Gird thee with thine ancient might,
Forth! and God defend the Right!
_By permission of the Author_
We've shut the gates by Dover Straits,
And North, where the tides run free,
Cheek by jowl, our watchdogs prowl,
Gray hulks in a grayer sea.
And the prayer that England prays to-night--
O Lord of our destiny!--
As the foam of our plunging prows, is white;
We have stood for peace, and we war for right.
God give us victory!
Now slack, now strung, from the mainmast flung,
The flag throbs fast in the breeze;
Strained o'er the foam, like the hearts at home
That beat for their sons on the seas.
For mothers and wives are praying to-night--
O Lord of our destiny!--
But we've no time, for our lips are tight,
Our fists are clenched, and we're stripped to fight.
God give us victory!
The west winds blow in the face of the foe--
Old Drake is beating his drum--
They drank to "The Day", for "The Hour" we pray;
The day and the hour have come.
The sea-strewn Empire prays to-night--
O Lord of our destiny!--
Thou did'st give the seas into Britain's might,
For the freedom of Thy seas we smite.
God give us victory!
_By permission of the Author_
(_August 28, 1914_)
Ghostly ships in a ghostly sea,
(Here's to Drake in the Spanish Main!)
Hark to the turbines, running free,
Oil-cups full and the orders plain.
Plunging into the misty night,
Surging into the rolling brine,
Never a word, and never a light,
--This for England, that love of mine!
Look! a gleam on the starboard bow,
(Here's to the _Fighting Temeraire_!)
Quartermaster, be ready now,
Two points over, and keep her there.
Ghostly ships--let the foemen grieve.
Yon's the Admiral tight and trim,
And one more--with an empty sleeve--
Standing a little aft of him!
Slender, young, in a coat of blue,
(Here's to the _Agamemnon's_ pride!)
Out of the mists that long he knew,
Out of the _Victory_, where he died,
Here to the battle-front he came.
See, he smiles in his gallant way!
Ghostly ships in a ghostly game,
Roaring guns on a ghostly day!
There in his white silk smalls he stands,
(Here's to Nelson, with three times three!)
Coming out of the misty lands
Far, far over the misty sea.
Now the Foe is a crippled wreck,
Limping out of the deadly fight.
Smiling yond on the quarter-deck
Stands the Spirit, all silver-bright.
_From "Sea Dogs and Men at Arms"--
G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York. By
permission of the Author_
(_At the Guildhall, London, September 4, 1914_)
The issue has passed out of the domain of argument into another field.
But let me ask you, and through you the world outside, what would
have been our condition to-day, if through timidity, or through a
perverted calculation of self-interest, or through a paralysis of the
sense of honour and duty, we had been base enough to be false to our
word and faithless to our friends? Our eyes would have been turned
at this moment, with those of the whole civilized world, to Belgium,
a small State which has lived for more than seventy years under a
several and collective guarantee to which we, in common with Prussia
and Austria, were parties. We should have seen, at the instance and
by the action of two of those guaranteeing Powers, her neutrality
violated, her independence strangled, her territory made use of as
affording the easiest and most convenient road to a war of unprovoked
aggression against France. We, the British people, should at this
moment be standing by, with folded arms and with such countenance as
we could command, while this small and unprotected State, in defence
of her vital liberties, made a heroic stand against overweening and
overwhelming force. We should have been admiring as detached spectators
the siege of Liege, the steady and manful resistance of a small
army, the occupation of Brussels with all its splendid traditions
and memories, the gradual forcing back of the patriotic defenders
of their fatherland to the ramparts of Antwerp, countless outrages
suffered by them, buccaneering levies exacted from the unoffending
civil population, and, finally, the greatest crime committed against
civilization and culture since the Thirty Years' War, the sack of
Louvain, with its buildings, its pictures, its unique library,
its unrivalled associations, a shameless holocaust of irreparable
treasures, lit up by blind barbarian vengeance. What account could we,
the Government and the people of this country, have been able to render
to the tribunal of our national conscience and sense of honour, if, in
defiance of our plighted and solemn obligations, we had endured, and
had not done our best to prevent, yes, to avenge, these intolerable
wrongs? For my part, I say that sooner than be a silent witness, which
means in effect a willing accomplice, to this tragic triumph of force
over law, and of brutality over freedom, I would see this country of
ours blotted out of the pages of history.
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
Is there any one in this hall, or in this United Kingdom, or in the
vast Empire of which we here stand in the capital and centre, who
blames us or repents our decision? If not, as I believe there is not,
we must steel ourselves to the task, and, in the spirit which animated
our forefathers in their struggle against the dominion of Napoleon, we
must, and we shall, persevere to the end.
It would be a criminal mistake to underestimate either the magnitude,
the fighting quality, or the staying power of the forces which are
arrayed against us; but it would be equally foolish and equally
indefensible to belittle our own resources whether for resistance or
for attack. Belgium has shown us by memorable and glorious example what
can be done by a relatively small State when its citizens are animated
and fired by the spirit of patriotism.
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
Our self-governing Dominions throughout the Empire, without any
solicitation on our part, demonstrated with a spontaneousness and
unanimity unparalleled in history their determination to affirm their
brotherhood with us, and to make our cause their own.
From Canada, from Australia, from New Zealand, from South Africa,
and from Newfoundland, the children of the Empire assert, not as an
obligation, but as a privilege, their right and their willingness to
contribute money, material, and, what is better than all, the strength
and sinews, the fortunes and lives of their best manhood.
India, too, with not less alacrity, has claimed her share in the common
task. Every class and creed, British and native, princes and people,
Hindus and Mohammedans, vie with one another in a noble and emulous
rivalry. Two divisions of our magnificent Indian Army are already on
their way. We welcome with appreciation and affection their proffered
aid, and, in an Empire which knows no distinction of race or class,
where all alike, as subjects of the King-Emperor, are joint and equal
custodians of our common interest and fortunes, we here hail with
profound and heartfelt gratitude their association side by side and
shoulder to shoulder with our home and Dominion troops, under the flag
which is a symbol to all of a unity that the world in arms cannot
dissever or dissolve.
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
Never had a people more or richer sources of encouragement and
inspiration. Let us realize, first of all, that we are fighting as a
United Empire, in a cause worthy of the highest traditions of our race.
Let us keep in mind the patient and indomitable seamen who never relax
for a moment, night or day, their stern vigil on the lonely sea. Let
us keep in mind our gallant troops, who to-day, after a fortnight's
continuous fighting under conditions which would try the mettle of the
best army that ever took the field, maintain not only an undefeated but
an unbroken front.
Finally, let us recall the memories of the great men and the great
deeds of the past, commemorated, some of them, in the monuments which
we see around us on these walls, not forgetting the dying message of
the younger Pitt--his last public utterance, made at the table of your
predecessor, my Lord Mayor, in this very hall: "England has saved
herself by her exertions and will, as I trust, save Europe by her
example." The England of those days gave a noble answer to his appeal
and did not sheathe the sword until, after nearly twenty years of
fighting, the freedom of Europe was secured. Let us go and do likewise.
(_August, 1914_)
By all the deeds to thy dear glory done,
By all the life blood spilt to serve thy need,
By all the fettered lives thy touch hath freed,
By all thy dreams in us anew begun;
By all the guerdon English sire to son
Hath given of highest vision, kingliest deed,
By all thine agony, of God decreed
For trial and strength, our fate with thine is one.
Still dwells thy spirit in our hearts and lips,
Honour and life we hold from none but thee,
And if we live thy pensioners no more
But seek a nation's might of men and ships,
'Tis but that when the world is black with war
Thy sons may stand beside thee strong and free.
_By permission of the Author_
(_September 11, 1914_)
I was reading in the newspapers the other day that the German Emperor
made a speech to some of his regiments in which he urged them to
concentrate their attention upon what he was pleased to call "French's
contemptible little Army". Well, they are concentrating their attention
upon it, and that Army, which has been fighting with such extraordinary
prowess, which has revived in a fortnight of adverse actions the
ancient fame and glory of our arms upon the Continent, and which
to-night, after a long, protracted, harassed, unbroken, and undaunted
rearguard action--the hardest trial to which troops can be exposed--is
advancing in spite of the loss of one fifth of its numbers, and driving
its enemies before it--that Army must be reinforced and backed and
supported and increased and enlarged in numbers and in powers by every
means and every method that every one of us can employ.
What of the fight? With no vain boast
We meet the foeman on the field,
But each man's soul is as an host,
To fight, to die, but not to yield.
The glory of our splendid past
Shines on us as a quenchless sun,
That each and all may write at last
The simple tale of duty done.
What of the fight? Or well or ill,
Whatever chance our hearts are sure;
Our fathers' strength is with us still
Through good or evil to endure.
Our spirit, though the storm may lower,
Burns brighter under darkening skies,
Knowing that at the appointed hour
The glory of the dawn shall rise.
_By permission of the Author_
(_September, 1914_)
The gray battalions were driving down
Like snow from the North on Paris Town.
Dread and panic were in the air,
The fate of Empires hung by a hair.
With the world in the balance, what shall decide?
How stem the sweep of the conquering tide?
God of Justice, be not far
In this our hour of holy war!
In one man's valour, where all were men,
The strength of a people was gathered then.
"My right is weakened, my left is thin,
My centre is almost driven in,"--
The soul of a patriot spoke through the hush,--
"I shall advance!" said General Foch.
Forth from Paris to meet the storm
They rushed like bees in an angry swarm.
By motor and lorry and truck they came
Swift as the wind and fierce as flame.
Papa Joffre knew the trick
Of stinging hot and hard and quick.
Not for ambition and not for pride,
For France they fought, for France they died,
Striking the blow of the Marne that hurled
The barbarians back and saved the world.
The German against that hope forlorn
Broke his drive like a crumpled horn.
Their right was weakened, their left was thin,
Their centre was almost driven in,
When the tide of battle turned with a rush;
For France was there--and Ferdinand Foch.
Not since Garibaldi's stroke
Freed his land from the Austrian yoke,
And Italy after a thousand years
Walked in beauty among her peers;
Not since Nelson followed the star
Of Freedom to triumph at Trafalgar
On the tossing floor of the Western seas;
No, not since Miltiades
Fronted the Persian hosts and won
Against the tyrant at Marathon,
Has a greater defender of liberty
Stood and struck for the cause, than he
Whose right was weakened, whose left was thin,
Whose centre was almost driven in,
But whose iron courage no fate could crush,
Nor hinder. "I shall advance!" said Foch.
We who are left to carry the fray
For civilization on to-day,
The war of the angels for goodly right
Against the devil of brutish might,--
The war for manhood, mercy, and love,
And peace with honour all price above,--
What shall we answer, how prepare
For Destiny's challenge, Who goes there?
And pass with the willing and worthy to give
Life, that freedom and faith may live?
When promise and patience are wearing thin,
When endurance is almost driven in,
When our angels stand in a waiting hush,
Remember the Marne, and Ferdinand Foch!
_By permission of the Author_
(_September 13, 1914_)
His Majesty the King, London
I desire to congratulate you most heartily on the splendid action of
the British troops in the Battle of the Marne. In the name of the whole
Belgian nation I express to you our deepest admiration for the stubborn
courage of the officers and soldiers of your Army.
God will surely help our Armies to avenge the atrocities committed on
peaceful citizens and against a country whose only crime has been that
she refused to be false to her engagements.
O England! in thine hour of need,
When Faith's reward and Valour's meed
Is death or glory,
When Faith indites with biting brand,
Clasped in each warrior's stiffening hand,
A nation's story;
Though weak our hands, which fain would clasp
The warrior's sword with warrior's grasp
On victory's field;
Yet turn, O mighty Mother! turn
Unto the million hearts that burn
To be thy shield.
Thine equal justice, mercy, grace,
Have made a distant alien race
A part of thee.
'Twas thine to bid their souls rejoice
When first they heard the living voice
Of Liberty.
Unmindful of their ancient name,
And lost to honour--glory--fame,
And sunk in strife,
Thou foundst them, whom thy touch hath made
Men, and to whom thy breath conveyed
A nobler life.
They, whom thy love hath guarded long;
They, whom thy care hath rendered strong
In love and faith,
Whose heartstrings round thy heart entwine.
They are, they ever will be, thine
In life--in death.
(_Native Judge of the High Court of Hyderabad_)
(_At the Queen's Hall, London, September 19, 1914_)
There is no man in this room who has always regarded the prospect of
our being engaged in a great war with greater reluctance, with greater
repugnance, than I have done throughout the whole of my political life.
There is no man more convinced that we could not have avoided this war
without national dishonour. I am fully alive to the fact that every
nation which has ever engaged in any war has always invoked the sacred
name of honour. Many a crime has been committed in its name. There
are some crimes being committed now. All the same, national honour is
a reality, and any nation that disregards it is doomed. Why is our
honour as a country involved in this war? It is because we are bound
by honourable obligations to defend the independence, the liberty, the
integrity of a small neighbour. She could not have compelled us. She
was weak. But the man who declines to discharge his duty because his
creditor is too poor to enforce it is a blackguard.
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
What is a treaty, says the German Chancellor, but a scrap of paper?
Have you any five-pound notes about you? Have you any of those neat
little Treasury one-pound notes? If you have, burn them. They are only
scraps of paper. What are they made of? Rags! What are they worth?
The whole credit of the British Empire! Scraps of paper! I have been
dealing with scraps of paper in the last few weeks. We suddenly found
the commerce of the world coming to a standstill. The machine had
stopped. Why? The machinery of commerce was moved by bills of exchange.
I have seen some of them; wretched, crinkled, scrawled over, blotted,
frowzy; and yet those scraps of paper moved great ships, laden with
thousands of tons of precious cargo, from one end of the world to the
other. The motive power behind them was the honour of commercial men.
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
This is the story of the little nations. The world owes much to little
nations and to little men. This theory of bigness--you must have a
big empire and a big nation and a big man--well, long legs have their
advantage in a retreat. Frederick the Great chose his warriors for
their height, and that tradition has become a policy in Germany.
Germany applies that ideal to nations. She will only allow six-foot-two
nations to stand in the ranks; but all the world owes much to the
little five-foot-five nations. The greatest art of the world was the
work of little nations. The most enduring literature of the world came
from little nations. The greatest literature of England came from her
when she was a nation of the size of Belgium fighting a great empire.
The heroic deeds that thrill humanity through generations were the
deeds of little nations fighting for their freedom. Ah, yes, and the
salvation of mankind came through a little nation. God has chosen
little nations as the vessels by which He carries the choicest wines to
the lips of humanity, to rejoice their hearts, to exalt their vision,
to stimulate and to strengthen their faith; and if we had stood by when
two little nations were being crushed and broken by the brutal hands of
barbarism, our shame would have rung down through the everlasting ages.
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
The Prussian Junker is the road-hog of Europe. Small nationalities
in his way are flung to the roadside, bleeding and broken; women and
children crushed under the wheel of his cruel car; Britain ordered out
of his way. All I can say is this: If the old British spirit is alive
in British hearts, that bully will be torn from his seat. Were he to
win it would be the greatest catastrophe that has befallen democracy
since the days of the Holy Alliance and its ascendency. They think we
cannot beat them. It will not be easy. It will be a long job. It will
be a terrible war. But in the end we shall march through terror to
triumph. We shall need all our qualities--every quality that Britain
and its people possess--prudence in council, daring in action, tenacity
in purpose, courage in defeat, moderation in victory, in all things
faith, and we shall win.
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
It is a great opportunity. It only comes once in many centuries to the
children of men. For most generations sacrifice comes in drab weariness
of spirit to men. It has come to-day to you, it has come to-day to
us all, in the form of the glow and thrill of a great movement for
liberty, that impels millions throughout Europe to the same noble end.
It is a great war for the emancipation of Europe from the thraldom of
a military caste, which has cast its shadow upon two generations of
men, and which has now plunged the world into a welter of bloodshed.
Some have already given their lives. There are some who have given more
than their own lives. They have given the lives of those who are dear
to them. I honour their courage, and may God be their comfort and their
strength. But their reward is at hand. Those who have fallen have had
consecrated deaths. They have taken their part in the making of a new
Europe, a new world. I can see the sign of it coming in the glare of
the battle-field. The people will gain more by this struggle in all
lands than they comprehend at the present time.
But that is not all. There is something infinitely greater and more
enduring which is emerging already out of this great conflict; a new
patriotism, richer, nobler, more exalted than the old one. I can see a
new recognition amongst all classes, high and low, shedding themselves
of selfishness--a new recognition that the honour of a country does
not depend merely on the maintenance of its glory in the stricken
field, but in protecting its homes from distress as well. It is a new
patriotism. It is bringing a new outlook for all classes. A great
flood of luxury and of sloth which had submerged the land is receding,
and a new Britain is appearing. We can see for the first time the
fundamental things that matter in life, and that have been obscured
from our vision by the tropical growth of prosperity.
May I tell you, in a simple parable, what I think this war is doing for
us? I know a valley in North Wales, between the mountains and the sea,
a beautiful valley, snug, comfortable, sheltered by the mountains from
all the bitter blasts. It was very enervating, and I remember how the
boys were in the habit of climbing the hills above the village to have
a glimpse of the great mountains in the distance and to be stimulated
and freshened by the breeze which came from the hilltops, and by the
great spectacle of that great range.
We have been living in a sheltered valley for generations. We have been
too comfortable, too indulgent; many, perhaps, too selfish. And the
stern hand of fate has scourged us to an elevation where we can see the
great everlasting things that matter for a nation, the great peaks of
honour we had forgotten, duty and patriotism, and, clad in glittering
white, the great pinnacle of sacrifice pointing like a rugged finger to
Heaven. We shall descend into the valleys again; but as long as the men
and women of this generation last they will carry in their hearts the
image of these great mountain peaks, whose foundations are unshaken,
though Europe rock and sway in the convulsions of a great war.
Not by the valour of Belgium, nor the lightning sabre of France,
Not by the thunder of Britain's Fleet, and the Bear's unchecked
advance,
Not by these fears, Lord Kaiser, tho' they shatter a tyrant's lust,
Is your heart most darkly troubled, and your soul brought down to
the dust.
But by the great affirming of the lands we have knit as one;
By the love, by the passionate loyal love, of each separate freeborn
son.
Canada cries, "We are coming!" and Australasia, "We come!"
And you scowl that no Boer is rising at the beat of your German drum.
And the sons of Ind bear witness--"We have grumbled, but now no more;
We have shared your plentiful righteous Peace, we will share your
righteous War.
Trust us to guard your Honour, one with yours is our breath;
You have dealt us an even justice, we are yours to the gates of
Death."
Here in these rain-swept islands where we fought for the things of
peace,
Where we quarrelled and stormed in factions, at a stroke all factions
cease;
And there in the vast dominions, more free than your Prussian lords,
The women are shouting for England and the men are drawing their
swords.
_By permission of the Author_
(_November 9, 1914_)
The British Empire is now fighting for its existence. I want every
citizen to understand this cardinal fact, for only from a clear
conception of the vast importance of the issue at stake can come the
great national, moral impulse without which Governments, War Ministers,
and even Navies and Armies can do but little. We have enormous
advantages in our resources of men and material, and in that wonderful
spirit of ours which has never understood the meaning of defeat.
All these are great assets, but they must be used judiciously and
effectively.
I have no complaint whatever to make about the response to my appeals
for men--and I may mention that the progress in the military training
of those who have already enlisted is most remarkable; the country
may well be proud of them--but I shall want more men, and still more,
till the enemy is crushed. Armies cannot be called together as with
a magician's wand, and in the process of formation there may have
been discomfort and inconveniences and, in some cases, even downright
suffering. I cannot promise that these conditions will wholly cease,
but I can give you every assurance that they have already greatly
diminished, and that everything which administrative energy can do to
bring them to an end will assuredly be done. The men who come forward
must remember that they are enduring for their country's sake just as
their comrades are in the shell-torn trenches.
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
Although, of course, our thoughts are constantly directed toward the
troops at the front and the great task they have in hand, it is well to
remember that the enemy will have to reckon with the force of the great
Dominion, the vanguard of which we have already welcomed in the very
fine body of men forming the contingents from Canada and Newfoundland;
while from Australia, New Zealand, and other parts, are coming in quick
succession soldiers to fight for the Imperial cause. And besides all
these, there are training in this country over a million and a quarter
of men eagerly waiting for the call to bear their part in the great
struggle, and as each and every soldier takes his place in the field,
he will stand forward to do his duty, and in doing that duty will
sustain the credit of the British Army, which, I submit, has never
stood higher than it does to-day.
"I am the Lord of War", he said, and bared
His blade. "Dominion shall be mine alone."
East, south, west, north, his clamorous bugles blared,
His battle lines were thrown.
Then lo! the leopards of England woke from sleep,
Roaring their challenge forth across the sea,
And France's voice was heard in thunders deep,
Calling on Liberty.
And Belgium sprang, alert, to meet the foe,
And from her mountains Serbia sent her bands,
And the great bear of Russia, growling low,
Turned from his northern lands.
Far over land and sea the summons swept,
And Canada, among her fields of grain,
Threw down the sickle, caught the sword, and leapt,
Shouting, across the main.
Australia, hasting from the southward, came;
Africa, India, sprang into the fight.
"Lo, Kaiser! here our answer to thy claim;
Now God shall show the right."
Then he who drew the blade looked forth, and saw
That ring of steel and fire about his throne,
And knew himself at last, with trembling awe,
The Lord of Death alone.
_From "Spun-yarn and Spindrift"--
By permission of the Author and
J. M. Dent & Sons, Ltd., Toronto_
(_British House of Commons, November 11, 1914_)
The Empire is on its trial. The experience of these three months not
only encourages us to believe, but inspires us with the confident hope
that the longer the trial lasts, and the more severe it becomes, the
more clearly shall we emerge from it the champions of a just cause,
and we shall have achieved, not only for ourselves--for our direct and
selfish interests are small--but for Europe and for civilization, and
for the great principle of small nationalities, and for liberty and for
justice, one of their most enduring victories.
I never saw the cliffs of snow,
The Channel billows tipped with cream,
The restless, eddying tides that flow
About the Island of my dream.
I never saw the English downs
Upon an April day,
The quiet, old Cathedral towns,
The hedgerows white with may.
And still the name of England,
Which tyrants laugh to scorn,
Can thrill my soul. It is to me
A very bugle-horn.
A thousand leagues from Plymouth shore,
In broader lands I saw the light.
I never heard the cannon roar,
Or saw a mark of England's might;
Save that my people lived in peace,
Bronzed in the harvest sun,
And thought that tyranny would cease,
That battle-days were done.
And still the flag of England
Streamed on a friendly breeze,
And twice two hundred ships of war
Went surging through the seas.
I heard Polonius declaim
About the new, the golden age,
When Force would be the mark of shame,
And men would curb their murderous rage.
"Beat out your swords to pruning-hooks",
He shouted to the folk.
But I--I read my history books,
And marvelled as he spoke.
For it was glorious England,
The mother of the Free,
Who loosed that foolish tongue, but sent
Her Admirals to sea.
And liberty and love were ours,
Home, and a brood of lusty sons,
The long, North sunlight and the flow'rs,
How could we think about the guns,
The searchlights on a wintry cloud,
The seamen stern and bold,
Since we were hurrying with the crowd
To rake the hills for gold?
But it was glorious England
Who scanned the threatening morn.
To me the very name of her
Is like a bugle-horn.
_From "Sea Dogs and Men at Arms"--
G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York. By
permission of the Author_
(_May 19, 1915_)
Land of the desolate, Mother of tears,
Weeping your beauty marred and torn,
Your children tossed upon the spears,
Your altars rent, your hearths forlorn,
Where Spring has no renewing spell,
And Love no language save a long Farewell!
Ah, precious tears, and each a pearl,
Whose price--for so in God we trust
Who saw them fall in that blind swirl
Of ravening flame and reeking dust--
The spoiler with his life shall pay,
When Justice at the last demands her Day.
O tried and proved, whose record stands
Lettered in blood too deep to fade,
Take courage! Never in our hands
Shall the avenging sword be stayed
Till you are healed of all your pain,
And come with Honour to your own again.
_Reprinted by permission of London "Punch"_
(This "Chant of Love", by a distinguished American poet, is
a reply to Ernst Lissauer's notorious "Chant of Hate for
England".)
A song of hate is a song of Hell;
Some there be that sing it well.
Let them sing it loud and long,
We lift our hearts in a loftier song:
We lift our hearts to Heaven above,
Singing the glory of her we love,--
_England!_
Glory of thought and glory of deed,
Glory of Hampden and Runnymede;
Glory of ships that sought far goals,
Glory of swords and glory of souls!
Glory of songs mounting as birds,
Glory immortal of magical words;
Glory of Milton, glory of Nelson,
Tragical glory of Gordon and Scott;
Glory transcendent that perishes not,--
Hers is the story, hers be the glory,
_England!_
Shatter her beauteous breast ye may;
The spirit of England none can slay!
Dash the bomb on the dome of Paul's--
Deem ye the fame of the Admiral falls?
Pry the stone from the chancel floor,--
Dream ye that Shakespeare shall live no more?
Where is the giant shot that kills
Wordsworth walking the old green hills?
Trample the red rose on the ground,--
Keats is beauty while earth spins round!
Bind her, grind her, burn her with fire,
Cast her ashes into the sea,--
She shall escape, she shall aspire,
She shall arise to make men free:
She shall arise in a sacred scorn,
Lighting the lives that are yet unborn;
Spirit supernal, Splendour eternal,
_From "A Chant of Love for England, and Other Poems"--
By permission of the Author and
J. M. Dent & Sons, Ltd., Toronto_
(_April 22, 1915_)
The night of April twenty-second was probably the most momentous time
of the six days and nights of fighting. Then the Germans concentrated
on the Yser Canal, over which there was but one bridge, a murderous
barrage fire which would have effectively hindered the bringing up of
reinforcements or guns, even had we had any in reserve.
During the early stages of the battle, the enemy had succeeded to a
considerable degree in turning the Canadian left wing. There was a
large open gap at this point, where the French Colonial troops had
stood until the gas came over. Toward this sector the Germans rushed
rank after rank of infantry, backed by guns and heavy artillery. To
the far distant left were our British comrades. They were completely
blocked by the German advance. They were like rats in a trap and could
not move.
At the start of the battle, the Canadian lines ran from the village of
Langemarck over to St. Julien, a distance of approximately three to
four miles. From St. Julien to the sector where the Imperial British
had joined the Turcos was a distance of probably two miles.
These two miles had to be covered, and covered quickly. We had to save
the British extreme right wing, and we had to close the gap. There
was no question about it. It was our job. On the night of April the
twenty-second we commenced to put this into effect. We were still
holding our original position with the handful of men who were in
reserves, all of whom had been included in the original grand total
of twelve thousand. We had to spread out across the gap of two miles
and link up the British right wing. Doing this was no easy task. Our
company was out first and we were told to get into field-skirmishing
order. We lined up in the pitchy darkness at five paces apart, but no
sooner had we reached this than a whispered order passed from man to
man: "Another pace, lads, just another pace". This order came again
and yet again. Before we were through and ready for the command to
advance, we were at least twice five paces each man from his nearest
comrade.
Then it was that our Captain told us bluntly that we were obviously
outnumbered by the Germans, ten to one. Then he told us that,
practically speaking, we had scarcely the ghost of a chance, but that a
bluff might succeed. He told us to "swing the lead over them". This we
did by yelling, hooting, shouting, clamouring, until it seemed, and the
enemy believed, that we were ten to their one.
The ruse succeeded. At daybreak, when we rested, we found that we had
driven the enemy back almost to his original position. All night long
we had been fighting with our backs to our comrades who were in the
front trenches. The enemy had got behind us and we had had to face
about in what served for trenches. By dawn we had him back again in his
original position, and we were facing in the old direction. By dawn we
had almost, though not quite, forced a junction with the British right.
The night of April the twenty-second is one that I can never forget. It
was frightful, yes. Yet there was a grandeur in the appalling intensity
of living, in the appalling intensity of death as it surrounded us.
The German shells rose and burst behind us. They made the Yser Canal a
stream of molten glory. Shells fell in the city, and split the darkness
of the heavens in the early night hours. Later, the moon rose in the
splendour of springtime. Straight behind the tower of the great
cathedral it rose and shone down on a bloody earth.
Suddenly the grand old Cloth Hall burst into flames. The spikes of fire
rose and fell and rose again. Showers of sparks went upward. A pall of
smoke would form and cloud the moon, waver, break, and pass. There was
the mutter and rumble and roar of great guns....
It was glorious. It was terrible. It was inspiring. Through an inferno
of destruction and death ... we lived because we must.
Perhaps our greatest reward came when on April twenty-sixth the English
troops reached us. We had been completely cut off by the enemy barrage
from all communication with other sectors of the line. Still, through
the wounded gone back, word of our stand had drifted out. The English
boys fought and force-marched and fought again their terrible way
through the barrage to our aid, and when they arrived, weary and worn
and torn, cutting their bloody way to us, they cheered themselves
hoarse; cheered as they marched along, cheered and gripped our hands as
they got within touch of us. Yell after yell went upward, and stirring
words woke the echoes. The boys of the Old Country paid their greatest
tribute to us of the New as they cried:
"Canadians--Canadians--that's all!"