Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.
further information is included below.  We need your donations.
Poems of Sidney Lanier.
In order to get a good copy, this text was typed in twice
from different sources -- an 1898 printing of the 1891 edition,
and a 1918 printing of the 1916 edition.  The differences are noted
in an appendix.  After the two copies were completed,
they were compared to eliminate any errors in the etext.
We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.
Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.
We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
million dollars per hour this year as we release some eight text
files per month:  thus upping our productivity from $2 million.
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is 10% of the expected number of computer users by the end
of the year 2001.
We need your donations more than ever!
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law ("IBC" is Illinois
Benedictine College).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go
to IBC, too)
For these and other matters, please mail to:
When all other email fails try our Michael S. Hart, Executive
Director:
We would prefer to send you this information by email
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
(Three Pages)
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Illinois Benedictine College (the "Project").  Among other
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
or:
requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
intended by the author of the work, although tilde
be used to convey punctuation intended by the
author, and additional characters may be used to
indicate hypertext links; OR
no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
form by the program that displays the etext (as is
the case, for instance, with most word processors);
no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
or other equivalent proprietary form).
"Small Print!" statement.
net profits you derive calculated using the method you
already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
Benedictine College" within the 60 days following each
date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
Association / Illinois Benedictine College".
Poems of Sidney Lanier.
Etext by A. Light, alight@mercury.interpath.net
Special thanks to Oliver Darmstaedter, Wiebke Schuck, and Thomas Schaich
for their help deciphering the old German font used for the poem (in German),
`An Frau Nannette Falk-Auerbach'.
Special thanks also to Sibyl Tyson, at The Springs Inn in Ponce de Leon, Fla.,
for assistance in making this etext possible.
if the italics were used for emphasis, or put in quotation marks,
if the italics indicated a quotation.  In one case,
an italicized and indented paragraph has been indented 10 spaces
to set it apart.  Lines longer than 78 characters are broken,
Poems of Sidney Lanier.
Edited by his wife (Mary D. Lanier)
With a Memorial by William Hayes Ward.
---- "Go, trembling song,
And stay not long; oh stay not long;
Thou'rt only a gray and sober dove,
But thine eye is faith and thy wing is love."
Contents.
Memorial.
Hymns of the Marshes.
I.  Sunrise.
(published December, 1882.)
II.  Individuality.
(published January, 1882.)
III.  Marsh Song -- At Sunset.
(published February, 1882.)
IV.  The Marshes of Glynn.
(published 1879.)
Clover.
(published 1876.)
The Waving of the Corn.
(1877.)
The Song of the Chattahoochee.
(1877.)
From the Flats.
(1877.)
The Mocking-Bird.
(August, 1877.)
Tampa Robins.
(1877.)
The Crystal.
(1880.)
The Revenge of Hamish.
(1878.)
To Bayard Taylor.
(March, 1879.)
A Dedication.  To Charlotte Cushman.
(`Earliest Collected Poems', 1876.)
To Charlotte Cushman.
(March, 1876.)
The Stirrup-Cup.
(1877.)
A Song of Eternity in Time.
(1880.)
Owl against Robin.
(August, 1880.)
A Song of the Future.
(1877-78.)
Opposition.
(1879-80.)
Rose-Morals.
(May, 1876.)
Corn.
(February, 1875.)
The Symphony.
(June, 1875.)
My Springs.
(October, 1882.)
In Absence.
(September, 1875.)
Acknowledgment.
(November, 1876.)
Laus Mariae.
(1876.)
Special Pleading.
(January, 1876.)
The Bee.
(October, 1877.)
The Harlequin of Dreams.
(April, 1878.)
Street Cries.
I.  Remonstrance.
(April, 1883.)
II.  The Ship of Earth.
III.  How Love Looked for Hell.
(March, 1884.)
IV.  Tyranny.
(February, 1868.)
V.  Life and Song.
(September, 1868.)
VI.  To Richard Wagner.
(November, 1877.)
VII.  A Song of Love.
(January, 1884.)
To Beethoven.
(March, 1877.)
An Frau Nannette Falk-Auerbach.
(1878.)
To Nannette Falk-Auerbach.
(1878.)
To Our Mocking-Bird.
(1878.)
The Dove.
(May, 1878.)
To ----, with a Rose.
(December, 1876.)
On Huntingdon's "Miranda".
(1874.)
Ode to the Johns Hopkins University.
(1880.)
To Dr. Thomas Shearer.
Martha Washington.
(1876.)
Psalm of the West.
(June, 1876.)
At First.  To Charlotte Cushman.
(1883.)
A Ballad of Trees and the Master.
(1880-81.)
A Florida Sunday.
(1877.)
To My Class:  On Certain Fruits and Flowers Sent Me in Sickness.
(October, 1884.)
On Violet's Wafers, Sent Me When I Was Ill.
(October, 1884.)
Ireland.
(1880.)
Under the Cedarcroft Chestnut.
(1877-78.)
An Evening Song.
(January, 1877.)
A Sunrise Song.
On a Palmetto.
Struggle.
Control.
To J. D. H.
Marsh Hymns.
Thou and I.
The Hard Times in Elfland.
(Baltimore, 1877.)
Dialect Poems.
A Florida Ghost.
(1877-78.)
Uncle Jim's Baptist Revival Hymn.
(Sidney and Clifford Lanier).  (1876.)
"Nine from Eight".
(March, 1884.)
"Thar's more in the Man than thar is in the Land".
(1869.)
Jones's Private Argyment.
The Power of Prayer; or, The First Steamboat up the Alabama.
(Sidney and Clifford Lanier).  (1875-76.)
Unrevised Early Poems.
The Jacquerie.  A Fragment.
The Golden Wedding of Sterling and Sarah Lanier, September 27, 1868.
Strange Jokes.
(1883.)
Nirvana.
(1871.)
The Raven Days.
Our Hills.
Laughter in the Senate.
Baby Charley.
(January, 1883.)
A Sea-Shore Grave.  To M. J. L.
(Sidney and Clifford Lanier).  (July, 1871.)
Souls and Rain-Drops.
(1883.)
Nilsson.
(April, 1883.)
Night and Day.
(July, 1884.)
A Birthday Song.  To S. G.
(1867.)
Resurrection.
(October, 1868.)
To ----.
The Wedding.
(August, 1884.)
The Palm and the Pine.
Spring Greeting.
The Tournament.
(1867.)
The Dying Words of Stonewall Jackson.
To Wilhelmina.
(September, 1884.)
Wedding-Hymn.
(August, 1884.)
In the Foam.
(1867.)
Barnacles.
(1867.)
Night.
(May, 1884.)
June Dreams, in January.
(September, 1884.)
Notes to Poems.
The Centennial Meditation of Columbia.  1776-1876.  A Cantata.
Note to the Cantata.
Memorial.
Because I believe that Sidney Lanier was much more than a clever artisan
in rhyme and metre; because he will, I think, take his final rank
with the first princes of American song, I am glad to provide
this slight memorial.  There is sufficient material in his letters
for an extremely interesting biography, which could be properly prepared
only by his wife.  These pages can give but a sketch of his life and work.
Sidney Lanier was born at Macon, Ga., on the third of February, 1842.
His earliest known ancestor of the name was Jerome Lanier,
a Huguenot refugee, who was attached to the court of Queen Elizabeth,
very likely as a musical composer; and whose son, Nicholas,
was in high favor with James I. and Charles I., as director of music,
painter, and political envoy; and whose grandson, Nicholas,
held a similar position in the court of Charles II.  A portrait
of the elder Nicholas Lanier, by his friend Van Dyck, was sold,
with other pictures belonging to Charles I., after his execution.
The younger Nicholas was the first Marshal, or presiding officer,
of the Society of Musicians, incorporated at the Restoration,
"for the improvement of the science and the interest of its professors;"
and it is remarkable that four others of the name of Lanier
were among the few incorporators, one of them, John Lanier,
very likely father of the Sir John Lanier who fought as Major-General
at the Battle of the Boyne, and fell gloriously at Steinkirk
along with the brave Douglas.
The American branch of the family originated as early as 1716
with the immigration of Thomas Lanier, who settled with other colonists
on a grant of land ten miles square, which includes the present city
of Richmond, Va.  One of the family, a Thomas Lanier, married an aunt
of George Washington.  The family is somewhat widely scattered,
chiefly in the Southern States.
The father of our poet was Robert S. Lanier, a lawyer still living
in Macon, Ga.  His mother was Mary Anderson, a Virginian of Scotch descent,
from a family that supplied members of the House of Burgesses of Virginia
for many years and in more than one generation, and was gifted in poetry,
music, and oratory.
His earliest passion was for music.  As a child he learned to play,
almost without instruction, on every kind of instrument he could find;
and while yet a boy he played the flute, organ, piano, violin, guitar,
and banjo, especially devoting himself to the flute in deference to
his father, who feared for him the powerful fascination of the violin.
For it was the violin-voice that, above all others, commanded his soul.
He has related that during his college days it would sometimes so exalt him
in rapture, that presently he would sink from his solitary music-worship
into a deep trance, thence to awake, alone, on the floor of his room,
sorely shaken in nerve.
In after years more than one listener remarked the strange violin effects
which he conquered from the flute.  His devotion to music
rather alarmed than pleased his friends, and while it was here
that he first discovered that he possessed decided genius,
he for some time shared the early notion of his parents,
that it was an unworthy pursuit, and he rather repressed his taste.
He did not then know by what inheritance it had come to him,
nor how worthy is the art.
At the age of fourteen he entered the sophomore class of Oglethorpe College,
an institution under Presbyterian control near Midway, Ga.,
which had not vitality enough to survive the war.  He graduated in 1860,
at the age of eighteen, with the first honors of his class,
having lost a year during which he took a clerkship in the Macon post-office.
At least one genuine impulse was received in this college life,
and that proceeded from Professor James Woodrow, who was then
one of Sidney's teachers, and who has since been connected with
the University and Theological Seminary in Columbia, S. C.
During the last weeks of his life Mr. Lanier stated
that he owed to Professor Woodrow the strongest and most valuable stimulus
of his youth.  Immediately on his graduation he was called to a tutorship
in the college, which position he held until the outbreak of the war.
And here, with some hesitation, I record, as a true biography requires,
the development of his consciousness of possessing real genius.
One with this gift has a right to know it, just as others know if they possess
talent or shiftiness of resource.  While we do not talk so much of genius now
as we did a generation ago, we can yet recognize the difference between
the fervor of that divine birth and the cantering of the livery Pegasus
forth and back, along the vulgar boulevards over which facile talent
rides his daily hack.  Only once or twice, in his own private note-book,
or in a letter to his wife when it was needful, in sickness and loneliness,
to strengthen her will and his by testifying his own deepest consciousness
of power, did he whisper the assurance of his strength.
But he knew it, and she knew it, and it gave his will a peace in toil,
a sun-lit peace, notwithstanding sickness, or want, or misapprehension,
calm above the zone of clouds.
As I have said, his genius he first fully discovered in music.
I copy from his pencilled college note-book what cannot have been written
after he was eighteen years old.  The boy had been discussing
the question with himself how far his inclinations were to be regarded
as indicating his best capacities and his duties.  He says:
==
"The point which I wish to settle is merely, by what method shall I ascertain
what I am fit for, as preliminary to ascertaining God's will
with reference to me; or what my inclinations are, as preliminary
to ascertaining what my capacities are, that is, what I am fit for.
I am more than all perplexed by this fact, that the prime inclination,
that is, natural bent (which I have checked, though) of my nature is to music;
and for that I have the greatest talent; indeed, not boasting,
for God gave it me, I have an extraordinary musical talent,
and feel it within me plainly that I could rise as high as any composer.
But I cannot bring myself to believe that I was intended for a musician,
because it seems so small a business in comparison with other things which,
it seems to me, I might do.  Question here, What is the province of music
in the economy of the world?"
==
Similar aspirations he felt at this early age, probably eighteen,
for grand literary labor, as the same note-book would bear witness.
We see here the boy talking to himself, a boy who had found in himself
a standard above anything in his fellows.
The breaking out of the war summoned Sidney Lanier from books to arms.
In April, 1861, he enlisted in the Confederate Army,
with the Macon Volunteers of the Second Georgia Battalion,
the first military organization which left Georgia for Virginia.
From his childhood he had had a military taste.  Even as a small boy
he had raised a company of boys armed with bows and arrows,
and so well did he drill them that an honored place was granted them
in the military parades of their elders.  Having volunteered as a private
at the age of nineteen, he remained a private till the last year of the war.
Three times he was offered promotion and refused it because
it would separate him from his younger brother, who was his companion in arms,
as their singularly tender devotion would not allow them to be parted.
The first year of service in Virginia was easy and pleasant,
and he spent his abundant leisure in music and the study of German,
French, and Spanish.  He was in the battles of Seven Pines,
Drewry's Bluffs, and the seven days' fighting about Richmond,
culminating in the terrible struggle of Malvern Hill.  After this campaign
he was transferred, with his brother, to the signal service,
the joke among his less fortunate companions being that he was selected
because he could play the flute.  His headquarters were now
for a short period at Petersburg, where he had the advantage
of a small local library, but where he began to feel the premonitions
of that fatal disease, consumption, against which he battled
for fifteen years.  The regular full inspirations required by the flute
probably prolonged his life.  In 1863 his detachment was mounted
and did service in Virginia and North Carolina.  At last the two brothers
were separated, it coming in the duty of each to take charge of a vessel
which was to run the blockade.  Sidney's vessel was captured,
and he was for five months in Point Lookout prison, until he was exchanged
(with his flute, for he never lost it), near the close of the war.
Those were very hard days for him, and a picture of them is given
in his "Tiger Lilies", the novel which he wrote two years afterward.
It is a luxuriant, unpruned work, written in haste for the press
within the space of three weeks, but one which gave rich promise of the poet.
A chapter in the middle of the book, introducing the scenes
of those four years of struggle, is wholly devoted to a remarkable metaphor,
which becomes an allegory and a sermon, in which war is pictured
as "a strange, enormous, terrible flower," which "the early spring of 1861
brought to bloom besides innumerable violets and jessamines."
He tells how the plant is grown; what arguments the horticulturists give
for cultivating it; how Christ inveighed against it,
and how its shades are damp and its odors unhealthy;
and what a fine specimen was grown the other day in North America
by "two wealthy landed proprietors, who combined all their resources
of money, of blood, of bones, of tears, of sulphur, and what not,
to make this the grandest specimen of modern horticulture."
"It is supposed by some," says he, "that seed of this American specimen
(now dead) yet remains in the land; but as for this author
(who, with many friends, suffered from the unhealthy odors of the plant),
he could find it in his heart to wish fervently that this seed,
if there be verily any, might perish in the germ, utterly out of sight
and life and memory, and out of the remote hope of resurrection,
forever and ever, no matter in whose granary they are cherished!"
Through those four years, though earnestly devoted to the cause,
and fulfilling his duties with zeal, his horror of war grew to the end.
He had entered it in a "crack" regiment, with a dandy uniform,
and was first encamped near Norfolk, where the gardens,
with the Northern market hopelessly cut off, were given freely
to the soldiers, who lived in every luxury; and every man had his sweetheart
in Norfolk.  But the tyranny and Christlessness of war oppressed him,
though he loved the free life in the saddle and under the stars.
In February, 1865, he was released from Point Lookout
and undertook the weary return on foot to his home in Georgia,
with the twenty-dollar gold piece which he had in his pocket when captured,
and which was returned to him, with his other little effects, when he
was released.  Of course he had the flute, which he had hidden in his sleeve
when he entered the prison, and which had earned him some comforts.
He reached home March 15th, with his strength utterly exhausted.
There followed six weeks of desperate illness, and just as he began
to recover from it his beloved mother died of consumption.
He himself arose from his sick-bed with pronounced congestion of one lung,
but found relief in two months of out-of-door life with an uncle
at Point Clear, Mobile Bay.  From December, 1865, to April, 1867,
he filled a clerkship in Montgomery, Ala., and in the next month
made his first visit to New York on the business of publishing
his "Tiger Lilies", written in April.  In September, 1867, he took charge
of a country academy of nearly a hundred pupils in Prattville, Ala.,
and was married in December of the same year to Miss Mary Day,
daughter of Charles Day, of Macon.
To the years before Mr. Lanier's marriage belong a dozen poems
included in this volume.  Two of them are translations from the German
made during the war; the others are songs and miscellaneous poems,
full of flush and force, but not yet moulded by those laws of art
of whose authority he had hardly become conscious.  His access to books
was limited, and he expressed himself more with music than with literature,
taking down the notes of birds, and writing music to his own songs
or those of Tennyson.
In January, 1868, the next month after his marriage,
he suffered his first hemorrhage from the lungs, and returned in May to Macon,
in very low health.  Here he remained, studying and afterward practising law
with his father, until December, 1872.  During this period there came,
in the spring and summer of 1870, a more alarming decline with settled cough.
He went for treatment to New York, where he remained two months,
returning in October greatly improved and strong in hope;
but again at home he lost ground steadily.  He was now fairly engaged
in the brave struggle against consumption, which could have but one end.
So precarious already was his health that a change of residence
was determined on, and in December, 1872, he went to San Antonio, Texas,
in search of a permanent home there, leaving his wife and children meanwhile
at Macon.  But the climate did not prove favorable and he returned
in April, 1873.
During these five years a sense of holy obligation, based on the conviction
that special talents had been given him, and that the time might be short,
rested upon Lanier, until it was impossible to resist it longer.
He felt himself called to something other than a country attorney's practice.
It was the compulsion of waiting utterance, not yet enfranchised.
From Texas he wrote to his wife:
==
"Were it not for some circumstances which make such a proposition
seem absurd in the highest degree, I would think that I am shortly to die,
and that my spirit hath been singing its swan-song before dissolution.
All day my soul hath been cutting swiftly into the great space of the subtle,
unspeakable deep, driven by wind after wind of heavenly melody.
The very inner spirit and essence of all wind-songs, bird-songs,
passion-songs, folk-songs, country-songs, sex-songs, soul-songs and body-songs
hath blown upon me in quick gusts like the breath of passion,
and sailed me into a sea of vast dreams, whereof each wave is at once
a vision and a melody."
==
Now fully determined to give himself to music and literature so long
as he could keep death at bay, he sought a land of books.  Taking his flute
and his pen for sword and staff, he turned his face northward.
After visiting New York he made his home in Baltimore, December, 1873,
under engagement as first flute for the Peabody Symphony Concerts.
With his settlement in Baltimore begins a story of as brave and sad a struggle
as the history of genius records.  On the one hand was the opportunity
for study, and the full consciousness of power, and a will never subdued;
and on the other a body wasting with consumption, that must be forced
to task beyond its strength not merely to express the thoughts of beauty
which strove for utterance, but from the necessity of providing bread
for his babes.  His father would have had him return to Macon,
and settle down with him in business and share his income,
but that would have been the suicide of every duty and ambition.
So he wrote from Baltimore to his father, November 29, 1873:
==
"I have given your last letter the fullest and most careful consideration.
After doing so I feel sure that Macon is not the place for me.
If you could taste the delicious crystalline air, and the champagne breeze
that I've just been rushing about in, I am equally sure
that in point of climate you would agree with me that my chance for life
is ten times as great here as in Macon.  Then, as to business, why should I,
nay, how CAN I, settle myself down to be a third-rate struggling lawyer
for the balance of my little life, as long as there is a certainty
almost absolute that I can do some other thing so much better?
Several persons, from whose judgment in such matters there can be no appeal,
have told me, for instance, that I am the greatest flute-player in the world;
and several others, of equally authoritative judgment,
have given me an almost equal encouragement to work with my pen.
(Of course I protest against the necessity which makes me write
such things about myself.  I only do so because I so appreciate
the love and tenderness which prompt you to desire me with you
that I will make the fullest explanation possible of my course,
out of reciprocal honor and respect for the motives which lead you
to think differently from me.)  My dear father, think how, for twenty years,
through poverty, through pain, through weariness, through sickness,
through the uncongenial atmosphere of a farcical college and of a bare army
and then of an exacting business life, through all the discouragement
of being wholly unacquainted with literary people and literary ways --
I say, think how, in spite of all these depressing circumstances,
and of a thousand more which I could enumerate, these two figures
of music and of poetry have steadily kept in my heart
so that I could not banish them.  Does it not seem to you as to me,
that I begin to have the right to enroll myself among the devotees
of these two sublime arts, after having followed them so long and so humbly,
and through so much bitterness?"
==
What could his father do but yield?  And what could he do
during the following years of his son's fight for standing-room on the planet
but help?  But for that help, generously given by his father and brother,
as their ability allowed, at the critical times of utter prostration,
the end would not have been long delayed.  For the little
that was necessary to give his household a humble support
it was not easy for the most strenuous young author to win by his pen
in the intervals between his hemorrhages.  He asked for very little,
only the supply of absolute necessities, what it would be easy
for a well man to earn, but what it was very hard for a man to earn
scarce able to leave his bed, dependent on the chance income had
from poems and articles in magazines that would take them, or from courses
of lectures in schools.  Often for months together he could do no work.
He was driven to Texas, to Florida, to Pennsylvania, to North Carolina,
to try to recover health from pine breaths and clover blossoms.
Supported by the implicit faith of one heart, which fully believed
in his genius, and was willing to wait if he could only find his opportunity,
his courage never failed.  He still kept before himself first his ideal
and his mission, and he longed to live that he might accomplish them.
It must have been in such a mood that, soon after coming to Baltimore,
he wrote to his wife, who was detained in the South:
==
"So many great ideas for Art are born to me each day, I am swept away
into the land of All-Delight by their strenuous sweet whirlwind;
and I find within myself such entire, yet humble, confidence
of possessing every single element of power to carry them all out,
save the little paltry sum of money that would suffice to keep us
clothed and fed in the meantime.
"I do not understand this."
==
Lanier's was an unknown name, and he would write only in obedience
to his own sense of art, and he did not fit his wares
to the taste of those who buy verse.  It was to comfort his wife,
in this period of greatest uncertainty whether he had not erred
in launching in the sea of literature, that he wrote again
a letter of frankest confession:
==
"I will make to thee a little confession of faith, telling thee,
my dearer self, in words, what I do not say to my not-so-dear-self
except in more modest feeling.
"Know, then, that disappointments were inevitable, and will still come
until I have fought the battle which every great artist has had to fight
since time began.  This -- dimly felt while I was doubtful
of my own vocation and powers -- is clear as the sun to me now that I KNOW,
through the fiercest tests of life, that I am in soul, and shall be
in life and utterance, a great poet.
"The philosophy of my disappointments is, that there is so much CLEVERNESS
standing betwixt me and the public . . .  Richard Wagner is
sixty years old and over, and one-half of the most cultivated artists
of the most cultivated art-land, quoad music, still think him an absurdity.
Says Schumann in one of his letters:  `The publishers will not listen to me
for a moment'; and dost thou not remember Schubert, and Richter,
and John Keats, and a sweet host more?
"Now this is written because I sit here in my room daily,
and picture THEE picturing ME worn, and troubled, or disheartened;
and because I do not wish thee to think up any groundless sorrow in thy soul.
Of course I have my keen sorrows, momentarily more keen than I would like
any one to know; but I thank God that in a knowledge of Him and of myself
which cometh to me daily in fresh revelations, I have a steadfast
firmament of blue, in which all clouds soon dissolve.
I have wanted to say this several times of late, but it is not easy
to bring one's self to talk so of one's self, even to one's dearer self.
"Have then . . . no fears nor anxieties in my behalf;
look upon all my disappointments as mere witnesses that art has no enemy
so unrelenting as cleverness, and as rough weather that seasons timber.
is a small business:  `Que mon nom soit fle/tri, que la France soit libre!'
quoth Danton; which is to say, interpreted by my environment:
Let my name perish -- the poetry is good poetry and the music is good music,
and beauty dieth not, and the heart that needs it will find it."
==
Having now given sacredly to art what vital forces his will could command,
he devoted himself, with an intense energy, to the study
of English literature, making himself a master of Anglo-Saxon
and early English texts, and pursuing the study down to our own times.
He read freely, also, and with a scholar's nice eagerness,
in further fields of study, but all with a view to gathering the stores
which a full man might draw from in the practice of poetic art;
for he had that large compass which sees and seeks truths
in various excursions, and no field of history, or philology, or philosophy,
or science found him unsympathetic.  The opportunity for these studies
opened a new era in his development, while we begin to find
a crystallization of that theory of formal verse which he adopted,
and a growing power to master it.  To this artistic side of poetry he gave,
from this time, very special study, until he had formulated it
in his lectures in the Johns Hopkins University, and in his volume
"The Science of English Verse".
But from this time the struggle against his fatal disease
was conscious and constant.  In May, 1874, he visited Florida
under an engagement to write a book for distribution by a railroad company.
Two months of the summer were spent with his family at Sunnyside, Ga.,
where "Corn" was written.  This poem, published in `Lippincott's Magazine',
was much copied, and made him known to many admirers.
No one of these was of so much value to him as Bayard Taylor,
at whose suggestion he was chosen to write the cantata
for the opening of the Centennial Exposition at Philadelphia,
and with whom he carried on a correspondence so long as Mr. Taylor lived.
To Mr. Taylor he owed introductions of value to other writers,
and for his sympathy and aid his letters prove that he felt very grateful.
In his first letter to Mr. Taylor, written August 7, 1875, he says:
==
"I could never describe to you what a mere drought and famine
my life has been, as regards that multitude of matters which I fancy
one absorbs when one is in an atmosphere of art, or when one
is in conversational relation with men of letters, with travellers,
with persons who have either seen, or written, or done large things.
Perhaps you know that, with us of the younger generation in the South
since the war, pretty much the whole of life has been merely not dying."
==
The selection of Mr. Lanier to write the Centennial Cantata
first brought his name into general notice; but its publication,
in advance of the music by Dudley Buck, was the occasion
of an immense amount of ridicule, more or less good-humored.  It was written
by a musician to go with music under the new relations of poetry to music
brought about by the great modern development of the orchestra,
and was not to be judged without its orchestral accompaniment.
The criticism it received pained our poet, but did not at all affect his faith
in his theories of art.  To his father he wrote from New York, May 8, 1876:
==
"My experience in the varying judgments given about poetry . . .
has all converged upon one solitary principle, and the experience
of the artist in all ages is reported by history to be of precisely
the same direction.  That principle is, that the artist shall put forth,
humbly and lovingly, and without bitterness against opposition,
the very best and highest that is within him, utterly regardless
of contemporary criticism.  What possible claim can contemporary criticism
set up to respect -- that criticism which crucified Jesus Christ,
stoned Stephen, hooted Paul for a madman, tried Luther for a criminal,
tortured Galileo, bound Columbus in chains, drove Dante into a hell of exile,
made Shakespeare write the sonnet, `When in disgrace with fortune
and men's eyes', gave Milton five pounds for `Paradise Lost',
kept Samuel Johnson cooling his heels on Lord Chesterfield's doorstep,
reviled Shelley as an unclean dog, killed Keats, cracked jokes on Glueck,
Schubert, Beethoven, Berlioz, and Wagner, and committed so many other
impious follies and stupidities that a thousand letters like this
could not suffice even to catalogue them?"
==
Since first coming to the North in September, 1873,
Mr. Lanier had been separated from his family.  The two happy months with them
after his visit to Florida was followed by several other briefer visits.
The winters of 1874-75 and 1875-76 found him still in Baltimore,
playing at the Peabody, pursuing his studies and writing the "Symphony",
the "Psalm of the West", the "Cantata", and some shorter poems,
with a series of prose descriptive articles for `Lippincott's Magazine'.
In the summer of 1876 he called his family to join him at West Chester, Pa.
This was authorized by an engagement to write the Life of Charlotte Cushman.
The work was begun, but the engagement was broken two months later,
owing to the illness of the friend of the family who was to provide
the material from the mass of private correspondence.
Following this disappointment a new cold was incurred,
and his health became so much impaired that in November
the physicians told him he could not expect to live longer than May,
unless he sought a warmer climate.  About the middle of December
he started with his wife for the Gulf coast, and visited Tampa, Fla.,
gaining considerable benefit from the mild climate.  In April he ventured
North again, tarrying through the spring with his friends in Georgia;
and, after a summer with his own family in Chadd's Ford, Pa.,
a final move was ventured in October to Baltimore as home.
Here he resumed his old place in the Peabody orchestra,
and continued to play there for three winters.
The Old English studies which he had pursued with such deep delight,
he now put to use in a course of lectures on Elizabethan Verse,
given in a private parlor to a class of thirty ladies.
This was followed by a more ambitious "Shakespeare Course" of lectures
in the smaller hall of the Peabody Institute.  The undertaking
was immensely cheered on and greatly praised, but was a financial failure.
It opened the way, however, to one of the chiefest delights of his life,
his appointment as lecturer on English literature for the ensuing year
at the Johns Hopkins University.  After some correspondence on the subject
with President Gilman, he received notice on his birthday, 1879,
of his appointment, with a salary attached (it may be mentioned),
which gave him the first income assured in any year since his marriage.
This stimulated him to new life, for he was now barely able to walk
after a severe illness and renewed hemorrhage.
The last two years had been more fruitful in verse than any
that had gone before, as he had now acquired confidence in his view
of the principles of art.  In 1875 he had written:
==
to give myself some freedom in my own peculiar style, and have allowed myself
to treat words, similes, and metres with such freedom as I desired.
The result convinces me that I can do so now safely."
==
Among his poems of this period may be mentioned "A Song of the Future",
"The Revenge of Hamish", and -- what are excellent examples of the kind of art
of which he had now gained command -- "The Song of the Chattahoochee",
and "A Song of Love".  It was at this time that he wrote
"The Marshes of Glynn", his most ambitious poem thus far,
and one which he intended to follow with a series of "Hymns of the Marshes",
which he left incomplete.
The summer of 1879 was spent at Rockingham Springs, Va.,
and here, in six weeks, was begun and finished his volume,
"Science of English Verse".  Another severe illness prostrated him
in September, but the necessity of work allowed no time for such distractions.
In October he opened three lecture courses in young ladies' schools;
and through the winter, notwithstanding a most menacing illness
about January 1st, he was in continuous rehearsals and concerts
at the Peabody, and besides miscellaneous writings and studies,
gave weekly ten lectures upon English literature, two of them public
at the University, two to University classes, and the remaining six
at private schools.  The University public lectures upon English Verse,
more especially Shakespeare's, in part contained, and in part
were introductory to, "The Science of English Verse".
The final consuming fever opened in May, 1880.  In July he went
with Mrs. Lanier and her father to West Chester, Pa.,
where a fourth son was born in August.  Unable to bear the fall climate,
he returned, alone, early in September to his Baltimore home.
This winter brought a hand-to-hand battle for life.  In December he came
to the very door of death.  Before February he had essayed the open air
to test himself for his second University lecture course.
His improvement ceased on that first day of exposure.
Nevertheless, by April he had gone through the twelve lectures
(there were to have been twenty), which were later published
under the title "The English Novel".  A few of the earlier lectures
he penned himself; the rest he was obliged to dictate to his wife.
With the utmost care of himself, going in a closed carriage
and sitting during his lecture, his strength was so exhausted
that the struggle for breath in the carriage on his return
seemed each time to threaten the end.  Those who heard him
listened with a sort of fascinated terror, as in doubt
whether the hoarded breath would suffice to the end of the hour.
It was in December of this winter, when too feeble to raise his food
to his mouth, with a fever temperature of 104 degrees,
that he pencilled his last and greatest poem, "Sunrise",
one of his projected series of the "Hymns of the Marshes".
It seemed as if he were in fear that he would die with it unuttered.
At the end of April, 1881, he made his last visit to New York,
to complete arrangements with Charles Scribner's Sons
for the publication of other books of the King Arthur series.
But in a day or two aggravated illness compelled his wife to join him,
and his medical adviser pronounced tent-life in a pure, high climate
to be the last hope.  His brother Clifford was summoned from Alabama
to assist in carrying out the plans for encamping near Asheville, N.C.,
whither the brothers went soon after the middle of May.
By what seemed a hopeful coincidence he was tendered a commission
to write an account of the region in a railroad interest,
as he had done six years before with Florida.  This provided a monthly salary,
which was to be the dependence of himself and family.
The materials for this book were collected, and the book thoroughly shaped
in the author's mind when July ended; but his increasing anguish
kept him from dictating, often from all speech for hours,
and he carried the plan away with him.
A site was chosen on the side of Richmond Hill, three miles from Asheville.
Clifford returned to Alabama, after seeing the tents pitched and floored,
and Mrs. Lanier came with her infant to take her place as nurse
for the invalid.  Early in July Mr. Lanier the father, with his wife,
joined them in the encampment.  As the passing weeks
brought no improvement to the sufferer he started, August 4th,
on a carriage journey across the mountains with his wife,
to test the climate of Lynn, Polk County, N. C.  There a deadly illness
attacked him.  No return was possible, and Clifford was summoned by telegraph,
and assisted his father in removing the encampment to Lynn.  Deceived by hope,
and pressed by business cares, Clifford went home August 24th,
and the father and his wife five days later, expecting to return soon.
Mrs. Lanier's own words, as written in the brief "annals" of his life
furnished me, will tell the end:
==
"We are left alone" (August 29th) "with one another.
On the last night of the summer comes a change.  His love and immortal will
hold off the destroyer of our summer yet one more week,
until the forenoon of September 7th, and then falls the frost,
and that unfaltering will renders its supreme submission
to the adored will of God."
==
So the tragedy ended, the manly struggle carried on
with indomitable resolution against illness and want and care.
Just when he seemed to have conquered success enough
to assure him a little leisure to write his poems,
then his feeble but resolute hold upon earth was exhausted.
What he left behind him was written with his life-blood.
High above all the evils of the world he lived in a realm of ideal serenity,
as if it were the business of life to conquer difficulties.
This is not the place for an essay on the genius of Sidney Lanier.
It is enough to call attention to some marked points
in his character and work.
He had more than Milton's love for music.  He sung like a bard
to the accompaniment of a harp.  He lived in sweet sounds:
forever conscious of a ceaseless flow of melody which,
if resisted for a while by business occupations, would swell again
in its natural current and break at his bidding into audible music.
We have the following recognition of his genius from Asger Hamerik,
his Director for six years in the Peabody Symphony Orchestra of Baltimore:
==
"To him as a child in his cradle Music was given:  the heavenly gift
to feel and to express himself in tones.  His human nature
was like an enchanted instrument, a magic flute, or the lyre of Apollo,
needing but a breath or a touch to send its beauty out into the world.
It was indeed irresistible that he should turn with those poetical feelings
which transcend language to the penetrating gentleness of the flute,
or the infinite passion of the violin; for there was an agreement,
a spiritual correspondence between his nature and theirs,
so that they mutually absorbed and expressed each other.
In his hands the flute no longer remained a mere material instrument,
but was transformed into a voice that set heavenly harmonies into vibration.
Its tones developed colors, warmth, and a low sweetness of unspeakable poetry;
they were not only true and pure, but poetic, allegoric as it were,
suggestive of the depths and heights of being and of the delights
which the earthly ear never hears and the earthly eye never sees.
No doubt his firm faith in these lofty idealities gave him the power
to present them to our imaginations, and thus by the aid
of the higher language of Music to inspire others with that sense of beauty
in which he constantly dwelt.
"His conception of music was not reached by an analytic study of note by note,
but was intuitive and spontaneous; like a woman's reason:  he felt it so,
because he felt it so, and his delicate perception required
no more logical form of reasoning.
"His playing appealed alike to the musically learned and to the unlearned --
for he would magnetize the listener; but the artist felt in his performance
the superiority of the momentary living inspiration
to all the rules and shifts of mere technical scholarship.
His art was not only the art of art, but an art above art.
"I will never forget the impression he made on me when he played
the flute-concerto of Emil Hartmann at a Peabody symphony concert, in 1878:
his tall, handsome, manly presence, his flute breathing noble sorrows,
noble joys, the orchestra softly responding.  The audience was spellbound.
Such distinction, such refinement!  He stood, the master, the genius."
==
In the one novel which he wrote at the age of twenty-five,
he makes one of his characters say:
==
"To make a HOME out of a household, given the raw materials --
to wit, wife, children, a friend or two, and a house --
two other things are necessary.  These are a good fire and good music.
And inasmuch as we can do without the fire for half the year,
I may say music is the one essential."  "Late explorers say they have found
some nations that have no God; but I have not read of any that had no music."
"Music means harmony, harmony means love, love means -- God!"
==
The theoretical relation between music and poetry would hardly
have attracted his study had it not been that his mind
was as truly philosophically and scientifically accurate,
as it was poetically sensuous and imaginative.  In a letter
to Mr. E. C. Stedman he complained that "in all directions
the poetic art was suffering from the shameful circumstance that criticism
was without a scientific basis for even the most elementary of its judgments."
Although the work was irksome to him, he could not go on
writing at hap-hazard, trusting to his own mere taste to decide what was good,
until he had settled for himself scientifically what are the laws
of poetical construction.  This accounts for his exposition
of the laws of beauty in that unique work, "The Science of English Verse",
which was based on Dante's thought, "The best conceptions cannot be
save where science and genius are."  The book is chiefly taken up
with a discussion of rhythm and tone-color in verse; and it is
well within the truth to say that it is the most complete and thorough
original investigation of the formal element in poetry in existence.
The rhythm he treated as the marking of definite time measurements,
which could be indicated by bars in musical notation,
having their regular time and their regular number of notes,
with their proper accent.  To this time measurement Mr. Lanier gave
the pre-eminence which Coleridge and other writers have given to accent.
He conceived of a line of poetry as consisting of a definite number
of bars (or feet), each bar containing, in dactylic metre,
three equal "eighth notes", of which the first is accented,
or in iambic metre (which has the same "triple" time),
of one "eighth note", and one "quarter note", with the accent on the second.
Thus the accented syllable is not necessarily "longer" than the unaccented,
except as the rhythm happens to make it so.  This idea is very fully developed
and with great wealth of curious Old English illustrations.
Under the designation of "tone-color" he treats very suggestively
of rhyme, alliteration, and vowel and consonant distribution,
showing how the recurrence of euphonic vowels and consonants
secures that rich variety of tone-color which music gives in orchestration.
The work thus breaks away from the classic grammarian's tables
of trochees and anapaests, and discusses the forms of poetry
in the terms of music; and of both tone-color and of rhythm he would say,
in the words of old King James, "the very touch-stone whereof is music."
Illustrations of these technical beauties of musical rhythm,
and vowel and consonant distribution, abound in Lanier's poetry.
Such is the "Song of the Chattahoochee", which deserves a place
beside Tennyson's "Brook".  It strikes a higher key,
and is scarcely less musical.  Such passages are numerous
in his "Sunrise on the Marshes", as in the lines beginning,
"Not slower than majesty moves,"
or the other lines beginning,
"Oh, what if a sound should be made!"
These investigations in the science of verse bore their fruit especially
in the poems written during the last three or four years of his life,
when his sense of the solemn sacredness of Art became more profound,
and he acquired a greater ease in putting into practice his theory of verse.
And this made him thoroughly original.  He was no imitator
either of Tennyson or of Swinburne, though musically he is nearer to them
than to any others of his day.  We constantly notice in his verse
that dainty effect which the ear loves, and which comes
from deft marshalling of consonants and vowels, so that they shall add their
suppler and subtler reinforcement to the steady infantry tramp of rhythm.
Of this delicate art, which is much more than mere alliteration,
which is concerned with dominant accented vowels as well as consonants,
with the easy flow of liquids and fricatives, and with
the progressive opening or closing of the organs of articulation,
the laws are not easy to formulate, but examples abound in Lanier's poems.
Mr. Stedman, poet and critic, raises the question whether Lanier's
extreme conjunction of the artistic with the poetic temperament,
which he says no man has more clearly displayed, did not somewhat hamper
and delay his power of adequate expression.  Possibly,
but he was building not for the day, but for time.  He must work out
his laws of poetry, even if he had almost to invent its language;
for to him was given the power of analysis as well as of construction,
and he was too conscientious to do anything else than to find out
what was best and why, and then tell and teach it as he had learnt it,
even if men said that his late spring was delaying bud and blossom.
But it would be a great mistake to find in Lanier only, or chiefly,
the artist.  He had the substance of poetry.  He possessed both elements,
as Stedman says, "in extreme conjunction."  He overflowed with fancy.
His imagination needed to be held in check.  This was recognized in "Corn",
and appears more fully in "The Symphony", the first productions
which gave him wide recognition as a poet.  Illustrations too much abound
to allow selection.
And for the substance of invention there needed, in Lanier's judgment,
large and exact knowledge of the world's facts.  A poet must be
a student of things, truths, and men.  His own studies were wide
and his scholarship accurate.  He did not believe that art comes
all by instinct, without work.  In one of his keen criticisms of poets
he said of Edgar A. Poe, whom he esteemed more highly
than his countrymen are wont to do:  "The trouble with Poe was,
he did not KNOW enough.  He needed to know a good many more things
in order to be a great poet."  Lanier had "a passion for the exact truth,"
and all of it.
The intense sacredness with which Lanier invested Art held him thrall
to the highest ethical ideas.  To him the most beautiful thing of all
was Right.  He loved the words, "the beauty of holiness",
and it pleased him to reverse the phrase and call it "the holiness of beauty".
When one reads Lanier, he is reminded of two writers, Milton and Ruskin.
More than any other great English authors they are dominated by
this beauty of holiness.  Lanier was saturated with it.
It shines out of every line he wrote.  It is not that he never wrote
a maudlin line, but that every thought was lofty.  That it must be so
was a first postulate of his Art.  Hear his words to the students
of Johns Hopkins University:
==
"Let any sculptor hew us out the most ravishing combination
of tender curves and spheric softness that ever stood for woman;
yet if the lip have a certain fulness that hints of the flesh,
if the brow be insincere, if in the minutest particular
the physical beauty suggests a moral ugliness, that sculptor --
unless he be portraying a moral ugliness for a moral purpose --
may as well give over his marble for paving-stones.
Time, whose judgments are inexorably moral, will not accept his work.
For, indeed, we may say that he who has not yet perceived
how artistic beauty and moral beauty are convergent lines
which run back into a common ideal origin, and who therefore is not afire
with moral beauty just as with artistic beauty -- that he, in short,
who has not come to that stage of quiet and eternal frenzy
in which the beauty of holiness and the holiness of beauty mean one thing,
burn as one fire, shine as one light within him; he is not yet
the great artist."
==
And he returns to the theme:
==
"Can not one say with authority to the young artist, whether working
in stone, in color, in tones, or in character-forms of the novel:
So far from dreading that your moral purpose will interfere
with your beautiful creation, go forward in the clear conviction
that unless you are suffused -- soul and body, one might say --
with that moral purpose which finds its largest expression in love;
that is, the love of all things in their proper relation;
unless you are suffused with this love, do not dare to meddle with beauty;
unless you are suffused with beauty, do not dare to meddle with love;
unless you are suffused with truth, do not dare to meddle with goodness;
in a word, unless you are suffused with truth, wisdom, goodness, and love,
abandon the hope that the ages will accept you as an artist."
==
Thus was it true, as was said of his work by his associate,
Dr. Wm. Hand Browne, that "one thread of purpose runs through it all.
This thread is found in his fervid love for his fellow-men,
and his never ceasing endeavors to kindle an enthusiasm
for beauty, purity, nobility of life, which he held it the poet's first duty
to teach and to exemplify."  And so there came into his verse
a solemn, worshipful element, dominating it everywhere,
and giving loftiness to its beauty.  For he was the democrat whom he described
in contrast to Whitman's mere brawny, six-footed, open-shirted hero,
whose strength was only that of the biceps:
==
"My democrat, the democrat whom I contemplate with pleasure,
the democrat who is to write or to read the poetry of the future,
may have a mere thread for his biceps, yet he shall be strong enough
to handle hell; he shall play ball with the earth;
and albeit his stature may be no more than a boy's,
he shall still be taller than the great redwoods of California;
his height shall be the height of great resolution,
and love, and faith, and beauty, and knowledge, and subtle meditation;
his head shall be forever among the stars."
==
This standard he could not forget in his judgments of artists.
There was something in Whitman which "refreshed him like harsh salt spray,"
but to Whitman's lawlessness of art he was an utter foe.
We find it written down in his notes:
==
"Whitman is poetry's butcher.  Huge raw collops slashed from the rump
of poetry, and never mind gristle -- is what Whitman feeds our souls with."
"As near as I can make it out, Whitman's argument seems to be, that,
because a prairie is wide, therefore debauchery is admirable,
and because the Mississippi is long, therefore every American is God."
==
So he says of Swinburne:
==
"He invited me to eat; the service was silver and gold,
but no food therein save pepper and salt."
==
And of William Morris:
==
"He caught a crystal cupful of the yellow light of sunset,
and persuading himself to dream it wine, drank it with a sort of smile."
==
Though not what would be called a religious writer,
Lanier's large and deep thought took him to the deepest spiritual faiths,
and the vastness of Nature drew him to a trust in the Infinite above us.
Thus, his young search after God and truth brought him
into the membership of the Presbyterian Church while at Oglethorpe College;
and though in after years his creed became broader than that
imposed by the Church he had joined on its clergy, he could not outgrow
the simple faith and consecration which are all it requires of its membership.