Alexd^{r}. Maclagan.
Memoirs of the Poets,
I inscribe to you the present volume of "THE MODERN SCOTTISH MINSTREL,"
not to express approval of your political sentiments, nor to court your
patronage as a man of rank. Political science has occupied only a
limited share of my attention, and I have hitherto conducted my peculiar
studies without the favour of the great. My dedication is prompted on
these twofold grounds:--Bearing in your veins the blood of Scotland's
Illustrious Defender, you were one of the first of your order to join in
the proposal of rearing a National Monument to his memory; and while
some doubted the expediency of the course, and others stood aside
fearing a failure, you did not hesitate boldly to come forward as a
public advocate of the enterprise. Yourself a man of letters, you were
among the foremost who took an interest in the establishment of the
Scottish Literary Institute, of which you are now the President--a
society having for its main object the relief, in circumstances of
virtuous indigence, of those men of genius and learning who have
contributed by the pen to perpetuate among our countrymen that spirit of
intelligence and love of freedom which, by his sword, Sir William
Wallace first taught Scotsmen how to vindicate and maintain.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your very obedient, humble servant,
_STIRLING, June 1857._
Judging from a comparison of extant remains, and other means of
information now available, it may be doubted whether any country has
equalled Scotland in the number of its lyrics. By the term _lyrics_, I
mean specifically poetical compositions, meant and suitable to be sung,
with the musical measures to which they have been wedded. I include
under the term, both the compositions themselves, and their music. The
Scottish ballads are numerous, the Scottish songs all but numberless,
and the Scottish tunes an inexhaustible fountain of melody.
"And now 'twas like all instruments,
Now like a lonely flute;
And now it is an angel's song,
That makes the heavens be mute."
Look at the vast collections of them which have been published, and the
additions which are ever making, either from some newly-discovered
manuscript, or from oral tradition in some out-of-the-way part of the
country. The numbers, too, which have been preserved, seem to be
exceeded by the numbers that have unfortunately been lost. Who has not
in his ears the hum of many lyrics heard by him in his childhood--from
mother, or nurse, or some old crooning dame at the fireside--which are
to be found in no collection, and which are now to himself but like a
distant, unformed sound? All our collectors, whilst smiling in triumph
over the pearls which they have brought up and borne to the shore,
lament the multitude of precious things irrecoverably buried in the
depths of oblivion. Where, for instance, amid the similar wreck which
has befallen so many others, are now the ancient words pouring forth the
dirge over the "Flowers of the Forest," or those describing the tragic
horrors on the "Braes of Yarrow," or those celebrating the wondrous
attractions of the "Braw Lads o' Gala Water"? We have but the two first
lines--the touching key-note of a lover's grief, in an old song, which
has been most tamely rendered in Ramsay's version--these two lines
being--
"Alas! that I came o'er the moor,
And left my love behind me."
Only one verse has floated down of an old song, which breathes the very
soul of a lover's restless longings:--
"Aye wakin', O!
Wakin' aye an' eerie;
Sleep I canna get
For thinkin' on my dearie;
Aye wakin', O!"
Does it not at once pique and disappoint the fancy, that these two
graceful verses are all that remain of a song, where, doubtless, they
were once but two fair blossoms in a large and variegated posy:--
"Within my garden gay
The rose and lily grew;
But the pride of my garden is wither'd away,
And it 's a' grown o'er wi' rue.
"Farewell, ye fading flowers!
And farewell, bonnie Jean!
But the flower that is now trodden under foot,
In time it may bloom again."
Nay--passing from the tender to the grotesque--would it not have been
agreeable to hear something more than two lines from the lips of a lover
so stout-hearted, yet so ardent, in his own rough, blunt way, as he who
has thus commenced his song:--
"I wish my love were in a mire,
That I might pull her out again;"
or to know something more of the details of that extraordinary parish,
of which one surviving verse draws the following sombre picture:--
"Oh! what a parish!--eh! what a parish!
Oh! what a parish is that o' Dunkel':
They 've hang'd the minister, droon'd the precentor;
They 've pu'd doon the steeple, and drunk the kirk-bell."
The Scottish lyrics, lying all about, thus countless and scattered--
"Thick as autumnal leaves that strew the brooks
In Vallambrosa"--
are not like those which mark and adorn the literature of many other
countries, the euphonisms of a meretricious court, or the rhymed musings
of philosophers, or conceits from Pagan mythology, or the glancing
epigrams of men of wit and of the world, or mere hunting choruses and
Bacchanalian catches of a rude squirearchy. They are the ballads, songs,
and tunes of the people. In their own language, but that language
glittering from the hidden well of poesy--in ideas which they at once
recognise as their own, because photographed from nature--these lyrics
embody the loves and thoughts of the people, the themes on which they
delight to dwell, even their passions and prejudices; and vibrate in
their memories, quickening the pulses of life, knitting them to the Old
Land, and shedding a poetic glow over all the commonplaces of existence
and occupation. It is the faithful popular memory, more than anything
else, which has been the ark to save the ancient lyrics of Scotland. Not
only so, but there is reason to believe that our national lyrics have,
generally speaking, been creations of the men, and sometimes of the
women, of the people. They are the people's, by the title of origin, no
less than by the feeling of sympathy.
This, of course, is clear, as regards the great masters of the lyre who
have appeared within the period of known authorship--Ramsay, Burns,
Tannahill, Hogg, and Cunningham. The authors of the older lyrics--I mean
both compositions and tunes--are, with few exceptions, absolutely
unknown; but were there room here for discussion, it might be shewn that
all the probabilities lead up, principally, to the ancient order of
Minstrels, who from very early times were nearly as much organised and
privileged and honoured in Scotland, as ever were the troubadours in
Provence and Italy. Ellis, in the Introduction to his "Specimens of
Early English Metrical Romances," alluding to Scott's publication of
"Sir Tristrem," remarks--"He has shewn, by a reference to ancient
charters, that the Scottish minstrels of this early period enjoyed all
the privileges and distinctions possessed by the Norman trouveurs, whom
they nearly rivalled in the arts of narration, and over whom they
possessed one manifest advantage, in their familiar acquaintance with
the usual scenes of chivalry." These minstrels, like the majority of
poetic singers, were no doubt sons of the people--bold, aspiring, and
genius-lit--bursting strong from their mother earth, with all her sap
and force and fruitfulness about them. Amongst the last of the professed
minstrels was one Burn, who wonned on the Borders as late as the
commencement of the eighteenth century, and who, in his pleasant,
chirping ditty of "Leader Haughs and Yarrow," takes to himself this very
title of _Minstrel_.
"But Minstrel Burn cannot assuage
His grief while life endureth,
To see the changes of this age,
That fleeting time procureth.
For many a place stands in hard case,
Where blythe folk kenn'd nae sorrow,
With Homes that dwelt on Leader-side,
And Scotts that dwelt on Yarrow."
Of this minstrel Burn there is a quaint little personal reminiscence. An
aged person at Earlstoun many years ago related, that there used to be a
portrait of the minstrel in Thirlestane Castle, near Lauder,
"representing him as a douce old man, _leading a cow by a straw-rope_."
The master of the "gay science" gradually slipping down from the clouds,
and settling quietly and doucely on the plain hard ground of ordinary
life and business! Let all pale-faced and sharp-chinned youths, who are
spasmodic poets, or who are in danger of becoming such, keep steadily
before them the picture of minstrel Burn, "leading a cow by a
straw-rope"--and go and do likewise.
But as trees and flowers can only grow and come to perfection in soils
by nature appropriate to them, so it is manifest that all this rich and
fertile growth of lyrics, of minstrelsy and music, could only spring up
amongst a people most impressionable and joyous. I speak of the Lowland
population, and especially of the Borderers, with whose habits, manners
and customs, alone I am personally acquainted; and the lingering traces
of whose old forms of life--so gay, kindly, and suggestive--I saw some
thirty years ago, just before they sank under the mammonism,
commonplace, critical apery, and cold material self-seeking, which have
hitherto been the plague of the present generation. We have become more
practical and knowing than our forefathers, but not so wise. We are now
a "fast people;" but we miss the true goal of life--that is, _sober
happiness_. Fast to smattering; fast to outward, isolated show; fast to
bankruptcy; fast to suicide; fast to some finalé of enormous and
dreadful infamy. Bah! rather the plain, honest, homely life of our
grandfathers--
"Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife,
Their sober wishes never learn'd to stray;
Along the cool, sequester'd vale of life,
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way."
Or rather (for every age has its own type, and old forms of life cannot
be stereotyped and reproduced), let us have a philosophic and Christian
combination of modern adventure and "gold-digging" with old-fashioned
balance of mind, and neighbourliness, and open-heartedness, and thankful
enjoyment.
Our Scottish race have been--yes, and notwithstanding modern changes,
still are--a joyous people--a people full of what I shall term _a lyric
joyousness_. I say they still are--as may be found any day up the
Ettricks, and Yarrows, and Galas--up any of our Border glens and dales.
The Borderers continue to merit the tribute paid to them in the odd but
expressive lines of Wordsworth:--
"The _pleasant men of Tiviotdale_,
Fast by the river Tweed."
From time immemorial they have been enthusiastic lovers of song and
music, and have been thoroughly imbued with their influences. Bishop
Leslie, a contemporary of the state of manners which he describes, has
recorded of them, upwards of two centuries ago--"That they take extreme
delight in their music, and in their ballads, which are composed amongst
themselves, celebrating the deeds of their ancestors, or the valour and
success of their predatory expeditions;" which latter, it must be
remembered, were esteemed, in those days, not only not criminal, but
just, honourable, and heroic. What a gush of mirth overflows in king
James' poem of "Peebles to the Play," descriptive of the Beltane or
May-day festival, four hundred years ago! at Peebles, a charming
pastoral town in the upper district of the vale of the Tweed:--
"At Beltane, when ilk body bouns
To Peebles to the play,
To hear the singin' and the soun's,
The solace, sooth to say.
By firth and forest forth they wound,
They graithit them full gay:
God wot what they would do that stound,
For it was their feast-day,
They said,
Of Peebles to the play!
"Hop, Calye, and Cardronow
Gatherit out thick-fald,
With, _Hey and How and Rumbelow!_
The young folk were full bald.
The bagpipe blew, and they out threw
Out of the towns untald:
Lord! sic ane shout was them amang,
When they were owre the wald,
There west
Of Peebles to the play!"
Thirty years ago, the same joyousness prevailed in a thousand forms--in
hospitality, in festivity, in merry customs, in an exquisite social
sense, in the culture of the humorous and the imaginative, in
impressibility to every touch of noble and useful enthusiasm. It would
be easy to dilate upon the causes which seem to have produced this
choice joyous spirit in so unexpected a region as the far, bleak North:
but that would be a lengthened subject; and we must content ourselves at
present with the fact. And, instead of branching out into general vague
illustrations of what I mean by this lyric joyousness, I shall
_localise_ it, and embody the meaning in a sketch, light and imperfect
it must be, of a real place and a real life--such as mine own eyes
witnessed when a boy--and in the fond resuscitation of which, amidst the
usual struggles and anxieties allotted to middle age, memory and feeling
now find one of their most soothing exercises.
Let me transport the reader in imagination to the Vale of the Tweed,
that classic region--the Arcadia of Scotland, the haunt of the Muses,
the theme of so many a song, the scene of so many a romantic legend. And
there, where that most crystalline of rivers has attained the fulness of
its beauty and splendour--just before it meets and mingles in gentle
union with its scarce less beauteous sister, "sweet Teviot"--on one of
those finely swelling eminences which everywhere crown its banks, rise
the battlements of Fleurs Castle, which has long been the seat of the
Roxburghe family. It is a peerless situation; the great princely
mansion, ever gleaming on the eye of the traveller, at whatever point he
may be, in the wide surrounding landscape. It comes boldly out from the
very heart of an almost endless wood--old, wild, and luxuriant; having
no forester but nature--spreading right, left, and behind, away and
away, till lost in the far horizon. Down a short space in front, a green
undulating haugh between, roll the waters of the Tweed, with a bright
clear radiance to which the brightest burnished silver is but as dimness
and dross. On its opposite bank is a green huge mound--all that now
remains of the mighty old Roxburgh Castle, aforetime the military key of
Scotland, and within whose once towering precincts oft assembled the
royalty, and chivalry, and beauty of both kingdoms. At a little distance
to the east of Fleurs, the neat quaint abbey-town of Kelso, with its
magnificent bridge, nestles amid greenery, close to the river. And afar
to the south, the eye, tired at last with so vast a prospect, and with
such richness and variety of scenery, rests itself on the cloud-capt
range of the Cheviots, in amplitude and grandeur not unmeet to sentinel
the two ancient and famous lands.
Upwards of thirty years ago, the ducal coronet of Roxburghe was worn by
a nobleman who was then known, and is still remembered on Tweedside, as
the "Good Duke James." The history of his life, were there any one now
to tell it correctly, would be replete with interest. I cannot pretend
to authentic knowledge of it; but I know the outline as I heard it when
a child--as it used to be recited, like a minstrel's tale, by the
gray-haired cottager sitting at his door of a summer evening, or by some
faithful old servant of the castle, on a winter's night, over his flagon
of ale, at the rousing hall-fire. And from all I have ever learned
since, I judge that these country stories in the main were accurate.
He was not by birth a _Ker_--the family name of the house of
Roxburghe--descended of the awful "Habbie Ker" in Queen Mary's troublous
time, the Taille-Bois of the Borders, the Ogre-Baron of tradition, whose
name is still whispered by the peasant with a kind of _eeriness_, as if
he might start from his old den at Cessford, and pounce upon the rash
speaker. Duke James was an Innes of the "north countrie;" Banff or
Cromarty. He was some eight years of age in the dismal '45. Though his
father was Hanoverian, the "Butcher" Cumberland shewed him but little
favour in the course of his merciless ravages after Culloden. A troop of
dragoons lived at free quarters on his estate; and one of them, in mere
wanton cruelty, fired at the boy when standing at his father's door, and
the ball grazed his face. Seventy years afterwards, when he was duke,
the Ettrick Shepherd happened to dine at Fleurs. He was then collecting
his "Jacobite Relics," and the Duke asked him what was his latest
ballad? The Shepherd answered, it was a version of "Highland Laddie." He
sang it. On coming to the verse,
"Ken ye the news I hae to tell,
Bonnie Laddie, Highland Laddie,
Cumberland's awa' to hell,
Bonnie Laddie, Highland Laddie!"
the Duke burst into one of his ringing laughs--the fine, deep _Ho, ho!_
that would drown all our effeminate modern gigglings, the sound of which
lingers amongst the memories of my boyhood. "He well deserves it--he
well deserves it--the wretch! Ho, ho!"--and he shouted with laughter,
and threw himself into all the rough unceremonious humour of the ballad,
finishing off by relating his own dire experience of the doings of
Cumberland and his dragoons in the north. It seems he entered into the
army, and served in the American war. After retiring, I believe he took
up his residence in England--Devonshire, I think; his name at this time
was Sir James Norcliffe Innes. During the once-belauded "good old
times" of George III. he distinguished himself by holding and manfully
avowing opinions which were then branded as Jacobinism; and he was an
intimate friend, and I have heard an active supporter of the virtuous
and patriotic Major Cartwright. About the beginning of the present
century, the direct line of the Roxburghe Kers having failed, a
competition arose amongst a host of claimants, for the estate and
honours of that ancient House. After a most protracted and severe
litigation, which forms one of the _Causés Celebrés_ in the law-books of
Scotland, Sir James Norcliffe Innes was preferred. When approaching
fourscore, he was installed Duke of Roxburghe, and put on a coronet at
an age, long before which most part of mankind have put on their
shrouds. He put it on--ay, and for many years wore it stout and
stark--nobly, loftily, sweetly--with a dignity, simplicity,
large-heartedness, and munificence, the remembrance of which somehow
always brings to my mind that majestic line of Shakspeare, containing,
after all, only a name and title, yet sounding as the embodiment of
whatever is great and heroic in human character--
"Old John of Gaunt, time-honoured Lancaster!"
I see him before me, as he lives in the recollections of childhood--as
he lives and seems to speak in Raeburn's inimitable portrait at Fleurs.
What a perfect mould of man! scarce one mark of old age in that face--no
sign of weakness or decay in that frame, which has weathered eighty
winters. He was over the middle size; straight, firm, strong built, and
compact, with the air of native lordliness and command. His countenance
was peculiarly beautiful, full and rounded as if young; fresh-coloured;
and beaming with health, spirit, and vivacity. Its almost womanly
sweetness was chastened and redeemed by the massiveness of the head, the
deep penetrating eye, and an aspect of uncommon elevation and nobleness.
Till the last, he was the very personification of the old _Dux_--the
Duke of Chivalry--the foremost leader and commander of the people. But
instead of chained mail and helmet, he was to be seen every day walking
about amongst his people in hoddin-gray coat, nankeen breeches, white
vest, and rumpled white hat--plain, easy, manly, and unaffected in all
things.
Beyond the honour of an occasional pinch of the ears, or that kind,
homely greeting which in passing he bestowed on all of us, young and
old, I did not and could not know him personally. But, from those who
did, I have always heard the highest estimate of his character,
intellectually and morally. He possessed extensive information; but
rather that of a man who had moved much about, and observed much, than
from book-lore. His understanding was of the most masculine order--in
all his views and judgments, distinguished by clearness, decision, and
energy. But his great mental characteristic seems to have been
_wisdom_--that fine, just inward sense of things, which, like poetry, is
born in a man, not acquired--the result, generally, as in his case, of
an innate power, combined with large, varied, and calming experience.
Like most men of this stamp, he had both a keen sense of the humorous,
and a racy talent for it; abounded in sententious, remarkable sayings;
and had a dash of playfulness and eccentricity which gave a zest to his
many solid excellences. The physician who attended his deathbed, often
expressed regret that he had not kept a memorandum of his many striking
observations during the short period of his illness. His character,
morally, may be summed up in its two polar qualities--justice the most
austere, generosity the most tender and boundless. Interwoven through
his whole dispositions and actions was a strong, vehement temperament,
which infused into all he said and did a vivid intensity, which would
sometimes degenerate into sallies of passion, but which, upon the whole,
raised and exalted his character to the true heroic dimensions. His
factor, a respectable Edinburgh burgess, a gunsmith by trade, whom he
had selected for no aptitude but from the freak of the name (Innes),
could not always appreciate his schemes of improvement on the estate,
which really were not based on economic considerations, but were meant
to afford large means of employment to the people. In consequence, the
duke, though he respected him greatly, would sometimes be ruffled, and
blurt out a harsh thing at his expense. Walking with him one day in the
fields, he was explaining with the most animated eloquence, where he
intended to make some drains. "But," interrupted the burgess-factor,
only thinking of the balance-sheet, "you will spend a great deal of
money." "Yes," retorted the old nobleman, with ineffable contempt; "you
have guessed my object: I _will_ spend a great deal of money." Then,
turning quick on his heel, "You know more about the barrel of an old gun
than about drains." After one of those sallies, the factor, who resided
a few miles from Fleurs, and had swallowed and forgotten the bitter
dose, was preparing, about twelve o'clock at night, to go to bed, when
there was a sharp, sudden ring at the door-bell. It was a messenger from
the duke, with a letter, in which he stated, that, in reflecting on the
incidents of the day before retiring to rest, he felt remorse for the
taunt which he had uttered; that it was the ebullition of the moment,
but cruel and unkind; and that he could not sleep until he had received
forgiveness. It may be conceived in what ardent terms the factor
replied, and with what redoubled attachment he regarded and served such
a master! This was no exceptional blink of goodness. It was only a
specimen of his habit of justice, even against himself--of his
magnanimity and generous candour--changeless as the sun.
During the just, benignant sway of the "good Duke James," perhaps Fleurs
was the happiest place of all Scotland to live in;--not a happier could
be in the wide world. To have been born and brought up there, and in
one's childhood to have had such a taste of the "golden age," I have
always esteemed the sweetest privilege of life. No one can become
utterly sour, no one can lose faith and hope in humanity, who was
nurtured on the milk and honey of Fleurs, under "good Duke James."
Poetry and enthusiasm must spring eternal in his breast. This is no
illusion from the fancies of boyhood. Ask the old peasant of
Tweedside--a mature, hardy man then--and he will tell, with a glow on
his cheek, and a tear, due to remembrance, in his eye, "Ah! the Fleurs
was a braw place under auld Duke Jemmy!" Nature, industry, peace, mirth,
love, a kindred soul between duke and people, seemed to breathe in every
gale there, and sing in the matins and vespers of every bird. There the
_lyric joyousness_, characteristic of the Scottish people when allowed
freely to develop, expanded itself to the utmost of its power and
fervour. Fleurs was like the "Ida Vale" of Spenser:--
"In Ida vale, (who knows not Ida vale?)
When harmless Troy yet felt not Grecian spite,
An hundred shepherds wonn'd; and in the dale,
While their fair flocks the three-leaved pastures bite,
The shepherd boys, with hundred sportings light,
Gave wings unto the time's too speedy haste."
In our old, picturesque Saxon form of speech, the husband was the
"_bread-winner_." Duke James was emphatically the "_bread-giver_." To
furnish employment, to diffuse comfort and happiness amongst the
employed, was the all-absorbing object of his life. Anything that would
have ministered to his own luxury and glorification was but little
heeded. There might be pleasure-grounds more ornamental than his, walks
more trim, conservatories more gaudily replenished with exotics,
chambers more resplendent with costly furniture and pictures by the
great masters, equipage more gay and dashing--in all that belonged to
the _personnel_, he was plain and moderate; but where was there ever
such planting of forests, or cutting of timber, or building of this and
the other structure--all kinds of heavy works, employing hundreds of
hands? On many of the high labour-festivals which signalised the
calendar at Fleurs, upwards of _three hundred people_, all earning their
livelihood under his patriarchal sway, would dine together in the court,
and dance together on the velvet lawn in front of his castle. At six
o'clock on a mild summer evening, what a spectacle, to see Fleurs gate
thrown wide open, and troop after troop of labourers _debouche_!--not
worn-out, fagged, and sullen, but marching with alacrity and
cheerfulness--the younger lilting a merry song, the older and more
careful carrying home fagots of wood, gathered at their resting hours,
to supply the fire for their cheap evening meal. And all had some story
to tell of the _Duke_!--some little trait of kindness, or some of those
drolleries in which he would occasionally indulge, but ever without loss
of dignity. He used to walk for hours together beside my grandfather
whilst holding the plough--a wise and holy man, an Abraham amongst the
people--and converse with him as brother with brother, especially on the
incidents of his own life, and on matters of religion. On his coming
forward, my grandfather would take off his hat; but the duke would stop
him, and say, "Keep on your hat, James. It 's all very well to teach the
young fellows manners, but there 's no ceremony between you and me; we
are equals--two plain old men." His servants, of whatever degree, dined
together in the common hall; but some of the more aspiring "ambitioned"
(as the Yankees say) a separate table. One of them, who was supposed to
be rather a favourite, was deputed to break the project to the duke, and
obtain his consent at some propitious moment. Thinking he had him one
day in a most accommodating temper, he cautiously hinted the scheme, and
gradually waxed bolder, and disclosed all particulars, as the duke
seemed to listen with tacit approval. "Well, well," answered the duke,
carelessly, "all my servants are alike to me. You may dine at one table,
or at twenty, if you can so arrange it. But whatever the number"--here
his voice rose ominously, and his eye flashed with anger--"you, sirrah,
shall dine at the lowest!" The great question of the "tables" was
crushed. Sometimes--after the fashion of Haroun al Raschid, though not
in disguise--he would steal down quietly and unperceived, through the
out-of-the-way holes and corners of the immense castle, to see with his
own eyes what the inhabitants of the remoter regions were about. Some
dry joke, or some act of benevolence, according to circumstances, was
sure to be the result. As he was one day poking through the passages, he
suddenly encountered an enormously big, fat servant-woman, engaged in
cleaning a stair. She was steaming with perspiration. Eyeing her
curiously for a moment, "Ho, ho!" he cried (his usual introductory
exclamation), "do _you_ bake the bread?" The woman, staring in
astonishment, and, fortunately for her own self-complacency, not
understanding the point of the strange question, replied, "No, your
grace, that is not my department; I am in the laundry, and my business
is"--"Oh, never mind," said the duke, with the look of one greatly
relieved, "I am perfectly satisfied so you don't bake the bread." A
decayed gentleman, who had found harbourage at Fleurs, was staying
rather longer than convenient. It was in the depth of winter, and the
ground was covered with snow. The duke, who was an early riser in all
seasons, had been out for his morning walk; and on his return proceeded
to the gentleman's room, who was still in bed. "You lazy lie-a-bed!"
exclaimed the duke, "there 's a snow-ball for you--and there 's
another--and there 's another," and suiting the action to the word, he
discharged into the bed upon him a shower of white-looking balls; but
they happened to be, not snow-balls, but pound-notes squeezed into the
shape--report said, twenty in number. The gentleman took the practical
but benevolent hint, and departed, carrying with him the snow-balls, not
melted. In his more serious mood, he, one Sabbath, met a girl returning
from church, and inquired what church she had been attending. He then
walked with her a long time, discoursing upon the slight shades of
difference amongst the various religious denominations, and concluded,
"I shall not see it, but I believe that, in course of time, there will
be only one sheepfold under the one Shepherd."
Labour at Fleurs was a twin to mirth. We were always having festivities.
The duke was ingenious in devising reasons for them. Because he was
Scotch by origin, he celebrated all the peculiar Scottish festivals;
because he was English by residence, he celebrated all the peculiar
English festivals; because in his youth the "Old Style" of computing the
year was still used, he first of all held Old Year's Day, and New Year's
Day, and Twelfth Night, according to the new style, and then repeated
the observance all over again, according to the old style. And there was
a constant succession, the whole year through, of birth-days, and the
commemoration of public holidays and rejoicings.
"It was a merry place in days of yore."
Suppose summer shining in all its pride, and that labour is to enjoy one
of its highest festivals at Fleurs. All work ceases at noon; and by two,
the people, dressed in holiday attire, muster at the trysting-spot, and
march in a body to the castle, preceded by Tam Anderson, the duke's
piper, a grave, old-fashioned man, in livery of green coat and black
velvet breeches--a fossil specimen he of what the Border minstrel once
was, when his art was in its prime. As Tam drones away on his bagpipe
"Lumps o' Puddin'," and "Brose and Butter," they take their places at
three long tables, covering a large court. Three hundred workpeople and
their families are there; for the duke sternly forbids any but his own
people to be present. It is in vain for me, whose knowledge of cookery
never extended beyond the Edinburgh student's fare of mince collops and
Prestonpans beer, to attempt a description of this monster-feast--the
mountains of beef and dumplings, the wilderness of pasties and tarts,
the orchardfuls of fruit, the oceans of strong ale--the very fragments
of which would have been enough to carry a garrison through a
twelvemonth's siege. After having "satiated themselves with eating and
drinking," like the large-stomached heroes of the antique world, they
had an hour's interval for sauntering, that healthy digestion might have
time to arrange and stow away the immense load which the vessel had just
taken in. Again, however, they marshalled to the piper's warning note,
playing, "Fy, let us a' to the bridal!" and this time marched to the
spacious, smooth, and beautiful lawn in front of the castle, where
_Givan's Band_ awaited their arrival, and the dance speedily began. The
merriment now swelled to ecstacy; lads and lasses leaped through and
through, as on the wings of zephyrs; a hundred couples bounding at once
on the green sward; the old folks chiming in the chorus of universal
laughter, and snapping their fingers to the dances in which they had no
longer the strength and nimbleness to join; the youngsters getting up
mimic reels in sly corners; and the music seeming to stir into delight
the branches of the great elms which festooned this ball-room of nature.
But was there not something awanting to complete the unity of the scene?
Where was the presiding divinity?
" ... _Deus_ nobis hæc otia fecit,
Namque erit ille mihi semper deus."
Oh, for an hour past he has been watching the rustic carnival from
yonder portico, with his gracious duchess (much his junior), his true
help-meet in everything good, courteous, and benevolent! At length he
descends into the circle, with a smile to all, a word of recognition to
this one, a light airy jest at the expense of that one, and a responsive
_hooch_ to the wild, whirling dancers. As he advances, all the pretty
girls draw themselves up to catch his eye, and to have the honour of his
hand in the dance. He strolls about, peering gently, until, in some
obscure corner, he espies a young, shy, modest damsel, the lowliest
there, whom no one is noticing, a lowly worker in the back kitchen, or
even in the fields. Her he selects--blushing with surprise and a tumult
of nameless emotions--to be Queen of the festival; he pats her on the
shoulders, whispers paternal-gallant things in her ear, and calling
lustily for "Tullochgorum" from the fiddlers, leads her gracefully
through the dance, himself--though upwards of eighty--throwing some
steps of the Highland Fling, snapping his fingers, and _hooching_ in
unison with the impassioned throng of youths around him--those young
stately plants who have grown up under the dew and shelter of his benign
protection. When the dance is finished, kissing her on the cheek, he
leads his little simple partner back to her seat, and leaves her in a
delicious vision of the good old duke, who had distinguished her,
sitting solitary and unnoticed, above all her companions, and placed the
coronal upon her brow, queen of the festival. As he returns slowly to
the castle, there is an involuntary pause in the merry-making. The
musicians lay down their bows, the youths stop short in the mazes of the
Bacchic dance, the spectators stand up uncovered, the subtle electric
chain of love and loyalty passes between duke and people, and a grand
universal "hurrah!" rings through the welkin--the outburst of gratitude,
reverence, and joy. It is touching, solemn, sublime, this pause and
outburst of feeling in the midst of the wild festal scene. Not a maiden
there but loves him as she would a father; not a stalwart hind but, if
need were, would die in defence of his old chief. "When the ear hears
him, then it blesses him; and when the eye sees him, it gives witness to
him; because he delivers the poor that cry, and the fatherless, and him
that has none to help him. The blessing of him that is ready to perish
comes upon him; and he causes the widow's heart to sing for joy. He puts
on righteousness, and it clothes him; his judgment is as a robe and a
diadem."
But eighty-six years are a heavy load on the shoulders even of a giant.
The grasshopper at length becomes a burden to the strongest and most
cheerful. News came from the Castle that our old duke was unwell, was
confined to his room, then to his bed. One morning--I remember it as if
yesterday--as I was walking through the court-yard with one of the
farm-servants, the butler looked from a window above, shook his head
mournfully, folded his arms across his breast, and bent his eyes towards
the ground. We read his meaning at a glance,--"The good Duke James was
dead!" For days and days the people gave way to a deep, even a
passionate grief, as if each had lost a beloved father, and was left to
all the loneliness and privation of an orphan's lot. The body, or rather
the coffin which enclosed it, was laid out in state; and they were
allowed to take a last farewell of their chief. His valet, a favourite
servant, stood at the head, with his handkerchief almost constantly over
his eyes, scarcely able to hide his tears. The chamber was dimly
lighted, and filled with all the emblems of woe--in this case no
mimicry. All walked round, slowly and solemnly--the ancients of the
hamlet, the stalwart peasantry, and the women leading the children by
the hand--all gazing intently on the spot where the dead lay, as if even
yet to catch a glimpse of that piercing eye and benignant smile. The
silence was profound, awful, but for a throbbing under-hum as of stifled
breath, broken ever and anon by a sharp sob--the "hysterica passio," the
"climbing sorrow," which even reverence and self-restraint could no
longer keep down. The day of the funeral arrived. His remains were to
be borne about twelve miles off, to Bowden, under the shadow of the
three-peaked Eildons, for there the ancient vault is where lie "the race
of the house of Roxburghe." The long, long line of mourning carriages I
well remember; but these only spoke the general respect and commonplace
regret of the neighbourhood, which are incident to such an occasion. His
_people_ in their hundreds--these were his mourners! The younger and
stronger of them, in one way or other, accompanied the death procession
to the last resting-place. The women of the place, leading the children,
went down, all weeping as they went, to a bend in the Tweed, where there
would be a last view of the funeral train. There it was!--darkly
marching on the opposite bank, winding round the mouldering hillock
which was once Roxburgh Castle, and finally disappearing--disappearing
for ever!--behind that pine-covered height! As the last of the train
floated and melted away from the horizon, we all sunk to the ground at
once, as if struck by some instantaneous current; and such a wail rose
that day as Tweed never heard; whilst an echoing voice seemed to cry
along his banks, and into the depth of his forests--"The last of the
Patriarch-Dukes has departed!"
One instance is worth a thousand dissertations. And the above thin
water-colour sketch of a _real popular life_, though presenting only one
or two out of an endless variety of its phases, will give a more
distinct conception than a volume of fanciful generalities could, of
what I mean by the lyric joyousness of the Scottish people; and is,
besides, a sincere, though mean and unworthy tribute to the virtues of a
true patriarchal nobleman, about the last of the race, whose name, if
the world were not too apt to forget its most excellent ones, would be
eternised in the memory of mankind.
It is from this soil--this sensitive and fervid national temperament--that
there has sprung up such a harvest of ballads, and songs, and
heart-moving, soul-breathing melodies. Hence the hearty old habits and
curious suggestive customs of the people: the hospitality, exuberant as
Abraham's, who sat in the tent-door bidding welcome even to the passing
traveller; the merry-meetings and "rockings" in the evening, where each
had to contribute his or her song or tale, and at the same time ply some
piece of work; the delight in their native dances, furious and whirling
as those of the Bacchantes; the "Guisarding" of the boys at Christmas,
relic of old-world plays, when the bloody melodrama finished off into
the pious benediction--
"God bless the master of the house,
The mistress also,
And all the pretty babies
That round the table go;"
the "first foot," on New Year's morning, when none must enter a house
empty-handed; the "Hogmanay," or first Monday of the new year, when the
whole boys and girls invaded the country-side, and levied from the
peaceful inhabitants black-mail of cakes, and cheese, and ha'pence--
"Get up, gudewife! and shake your feathers,
Dinna think that we are beggars;
We are bairns come out to play,
Rise up and gie 's our Hogmanay!"--
the "Halloween," whose rites of semi-diablerie have been immortalised by
Burns; and the "Kirn," or Harvest Home, the wind-up of the season, the
epitome of the lyric joyousness of the whole year. Hence it is that
under an exterior, to strangers so reserved, austere, and frigid, they
all cherish some romantic thought, or feeling, or dream: they are all
inly imbued with an enthusiasm which surmounts every obstacle, and burns
the deeper and faster the more it is repressed. Every one of us, calling
up the history of our own little circle of cottage mates and
schoolfellows, could recount numerous pregnant examples of this national
characteristic. And hence, also, after wandering the wide world, and
buffeting in all the whirlpools of life, cautiously waiting chances,
cannily slipping in when the door opens, and struggling for distinction
or wealth in all kinds of adventure, and under the breath of every
clime--there are few, indeed, of our people, when twilight begins to
gather over their path, but turn towards the light that comes from their
old homes; and would fain pass a serene and meditative old age by the
burnside where they "paidled" in their youth, and lay down their bones
beside their fathers in the kirkyard of yon calm sequestered glen. Scott
went down to the nether springs of the national character when he made
his "Last Minstrel" sing--
"By Yarrow's stream still let me stray,
Though none should guide my feeble way;
Still feel the breeze down Ettrick break,
Although it chill my wither'd cheek;
Still lay my head by Teviot stone!"
Times have changed, it is true, even within the comparatively short
space which has elapsed since the death of the Good Duke James of
Roxburghe. Or rather, he was the last lingering representative of an
age, of ideas, of a state of manners--lovely, but transitional--which
had even then vanished, except the parting ray that fell on that one
glistening spot. It was the transition from Mediæval Clanship to Modern
Individualism--from that form of society where thousands clustered
devotedly round the banner of one, their half-worshipped chief, to the
present fashion, where it is, "Every man for himself, and God for us
all!" Yet the period of transition was a golden age. It was a golden
age--I know it, for I lived in it. There was the old patriarchy--the
feeling, undefinable to those who have not experienced the same state of
life, as if gods walked upon earth; and with this patriarchal,
overshadowing, protecting sway, derived from the old, there was blended
the modern recognition of the rights and dignity of man--the humblest
man--as an individual. Thrown, as we all now are, into the modern
anarchy, hurly-burly, and caricaturism, when fathers are "old
governors," and dukes are served solely for their wages and pickings,
like Mr Prog, the sausage-vendor, and the gentle look of respect and
courtesy has been exchanged for the puppy's stare through a
quizzing-glass; is it not something to have lived in the more reverent
primitive state, to have tasted its early vernal freshness, and basked
in its sunshine of loyal homage, and beautiful and stately repose?
Yet far be it from me to croak as the "laudator temporis acti." Past,
present, and future--all are divine--all are parts of a celestial
scheme--none to be scorned, all to be loved and improved. But the past
is under the sod; the future is behind the clouds; the present alone has
its foot upon the green sward. In a higher sense than the epicure's, it
is "_our own_." Let us, then, appreciate, exalt, and enjoy it. There are
good and glorious signs in our present, amid much that is of earth
earthy, and of self selfish. If man has become more isolated, more
rigidly defined, and has been stript of most of his old pictorial
haloes--he is also beginning to display a plain, honest, equal,
fraternal yearning and sympathy, man to man. Our hard material age shews
the buddings of a poetry of its own. Streams shall gush from the rock.
If there were, in the days of loyal Clanhood, joyousness, and generous
susceptibility, festive reliefs to labour, and reverence for greatness;
why should not this be so even more, under the influence of common
Brotherhood? "Charity never faileth!" Everything dies but charity and
joy. Even in the general conflagration, these will be exhaled from
earth, only to burst forth afresh in heaven--"a pure river of water of
life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God."
Truth and honour,                                                    7
Our ship,                                                            8
Auld Peter Macgowan,                                                10
The flower of Keir,                                                 11
Constancy,                                                          12
My bonnie wee wifie,                                                13
The bonnie bird,                                                    14
Come when the dawn,                                                 15
Good-morrow,                                                        16
Oh, wae's my life,                                                  17
Hey, my bonnie wee lassie,                                          18
Bessie,                                                             20
Courtship,                                                          21
Together,                                                           22
Florence Nightingale,                                               23
Laddie, oh! leave me,                                               25
How blythely the pipe,                                              26
The maid of Islay,                                                  29
The wee bird's song,                                                32
What makes this hour?                                               33
The lily of the vale,                                               35
How sweet are the blushes of morn,                                  35
Mild as the morning,                                                37
The beacons blazed,                                                 38
The rendezvous,                                                     40
Ilka blade o' grass gets its ain drap o' dew,                       43
The month of June,                                                  44
O'er the mist-shrouded cliffs,                                      47
O! lassie I lo'e dearest,                                           47
The bard strikes his harp,                                          50
Oh, my love 's bonnie,                                              52
The dreary reign of winter's past,                                  55
Oh, let na gang yon bonnie lassie,                                  58
The hameward sang,                                                  61
Dowie in the hint o' hairst,                                        62
On wi' the tartan,                                                  63
The rover o' Lochryan,                                              64
The last look o' hame,                                              65
The lads an' the land far awa',                                     66
My bonnie wee Bell,                                                 67
The maiden to her reaping-hook,                                     68
When the bee has left the blossom,                                  73
Oh, leave me not,                                                   74
Never despair,                                                      75
The year that 's awa',                                              78
Oh, dinna ask me,                                                   78
Love flies the haunts of pomp and power,                            79
War,                                                                80
The Highland maid,                                                  82
The Neapolitan war-song,                                            84
Our auld Scots sangs,                                               85
My laddie lies low,                                                 87
Jouk and let the jaw gae by,                                        88
Victorious be again, boys,                                          89
Fareweel to Scotia,                                                 91
The falcon's flight,                                                92
The salmon run,                                                     94
The blessing on the wark,                                           98
Jewel of a lad,                                                     99
Twilight joys,                                                     100
Oh, blessing on her starlike een,                                  102
Oh! blessing on thee, land,                                        104
The faithless,                                                     105
My soul is ever with thee,                                         106
Auld Johnny Graham,                                                107
Jean Linn,                                                         108
Bonnie Mary,                                                       109
The missionary,                                                    111
Farewell to Craufurdland,                                          114
The mariner's song,                                                116
Her lip is o' the rose's hue,                                      117
The bower o' Clyde,                                                119
Mary,                                                              122
In distant years,                                                  123
Young Randal,                                                      126
The ladye that I love,                                             127
Thou gentle and kind one,                                          128
Lament for the old Highland warriors,                              129
The swallow,                                                       132
Genius,                                                            133
My native land,                                                    137
A shepherd's life,                                                 138
Her I love best,                                                   140
The knight's return,                                               141
The bonnie Redesdale lassie,                                       143
The mountaineer's death,                                           144
Sweet Jessie o' the dell,                                          146
Meet me on the gowan lea,                                          147
Morag's fairy glen,                                                148
Oh! dinna cross the burn, Willie,                                  150
E'ening's dewy hour,                                               151
Watty M'Neil,                                                      153
I'll tend thy bower, my bonnie May,                                155
Wooing song,                                                       156
I'm wandering wide,                                                158
How early I woo'd thee,                                            160
Sister Jeanie, haste, we 'll go,                                   166
Oh, softly sighs the westlin' breeze,                              167
The mother and child,                                              172
Change,                                                            173
The tomb of the Bruce,                                             174
The ploughman,                                                     176
Woodland song,                                                     180
The wells o' Weary,                                                181
I'm naebody noo,                                                   182
I canna sleep,                                                     183
'Tis sweet wi' blythesome heart to stray,                          186
Oh, sweet is the blossom,                                          187
The squire o' low degree,                                          189
Bonnie Aggie Lang,                                                 193
The pride o' the glen,                                             194
Mary,                                                              196
Naebody's bairn,                                                   200
Castles in the air,                                                201
Ilka blade o' grass keps its ain drap o' dew,                      202
Wifie, come hame,                                                  203
The birdie sure to sing is aye the gorbel o' the nest,             204
Creep afore ye gang,                                               205
Ae guid turn deserves anither,                                     205
The nameless lassie,                                               206
Bonnie Bonaly,                                                     207
Saft is the blink o' thine e'e, lassie,                            208
The mair that ye work, aye the mair will ye win,                   209
The widow,                                                         209
Craig Elachie,                                                     212
The noble Scottish game,                                           216
The merry bowling-green,                                           218
Angling song,                                                      221
Let ither anglers,                                                 222
The British oak,                                                   223
Peace in war,                                                      224
Curling song,                                                      229
The auld meal mill,                                                230
The thistle,                                                       232
The Scotch blue bell,                                              233
The rockin',                                                       235
The widow,                                                         237
The Highland plaid,                                                238
The flower o' Glencoe,                                             239
Gentleness,                                                        242
He loved her for her merry eye,                                    244
Life and death,                                                    245
Good-night,                                                        246
Hurrah for the Highlands,                                          249
Old Scotland, I love thee!                                         250
Flowers of summer,                                                 251
Home of my fathers,                                                252
What ails my heart?                                                253
Away to the Highlands,                                             254
I'm away,                                                          255
There is a bonnie, blushing flower,                                256
The maid of Glencoe,                                               257
The fa' o' the leaf,                                               258
The auld kirkyard,                                                 260
Far, far away,                                                     261
The royal Breadalbane oak,                                         264
Evening,                                                           265
Mary,                                                              266
Absence,                                                           267
Is not the earth,                                                  269
Oh! love the soldier's daughter dear!                              270
The battle of Stirling,                                            272
Ye cowe a',                                                        274
My ain dear Nell,                                                  276
The pairtin',                                                      278
The missionary of St Kilda,                                        282
The return of peace,                                               285
The song of the carline,                                           288
The song of the kilt,                                              290
The storm blast,                                                   293
Light in the Highlands,                                            295
Francis Bennoch, the son of a farmer on the property of the Duke of
Buccleuch, and of a mother whose family have been tenants on the same
estate for nearly two hundred years, was born at Drumcrool, in the
parish of Durrisdeer, and county of Dumfries, on the 25th June 1812. At
the age of sixteen, in February 1828, he arrived in London, and entered
a house of business in the city. During the nine ensuing years, he
assiduously pursued his avocation, and strove to make himself master of
the elements and practice of trade. In 1837 he commenced on his own
responsibility, and every succeeding year has advanced him in mercantile
prosperity and position. Now, at the head of the firm of Bennoch,
Twentyman, & Rigg, wholesale traders and manufacturers, there is no name
in the city more universally respected.
In the corporate body of the city of London Mr Bennoch for some years
took a prominent part as a citizen, a common councilman, and lastly as
the deputy of a ward. An independent man and a reformer of abuses, he
has so managed his opposition to measures, and even to men, as to win
the warm approval of his own friends, and the respect of the leaders of
all parties. His plans for bridging the Thames may be referred to in
proof of his patriotic devotedness to improvement.
Influenced in his youth by the genius of the locality in which he was
born, to which the Ayrshire Ploughman had left a legacy of immortal
song, succeeded by Allan Cunningham, and a number of distinguished
followers, it was not, however, till he had been two years a denizen of
the metropolis that Mr Bennoch's Scottish feeling sought to vent itself
in verse. The love of country is as inherent and vehement in the
children of the North as in the Swiss mountaineers; wheresoever they
wander from it, their hearts yearn towards the fatherland--
"Land of brown heath and shaggy wood,
Land of the mountain and the flood,
Land of their sires"--
with the same cherished and enduring affection which excites in the
_Rans des Vaches_ so overpowering a sympathy. And the pastoral is
perhaps even more replete with the poetical elements than the "stern and
wild." It is amid such scenes as the Doon, the Tweed, the Teviot, the
Ettrick, the Gala, and the Nith adorn, that the jaded senses are prone
to seek recreation, and the spirit, tired with work or worn with cares,
flees rejoicingly from the world to the repose of its first breathing
and time-sweetened, boyish delights. Thus we find young Bennoch, amid
the clatter of the great city, turning to the quiet of his native valley
to sing the charms of the Nith, where he
"Had paidlet i' the burn,
And pu'd the gowans fine."
It was in the _Dumfries Courier_ that his first poetic essay found its
way to print. That journal was then edited by the veteran M'Diarmid,
himself an honour to the literature of Scotland, and no mean judge of
its poetry. A cheer from such a quarter was worth the winning, and our
aspirant fairly won it, by the five stanzas of which the following is
the last:--
"The flowers may fade upon your banks,
The breckan on the brae,
But, oh! the love I ha'e for thee
Shall never pass away.
Though age may wrinkle this smooth brow,
And youth be like a dream,
Still, still my voice to heaven shall rise
For blessings on your stream!"
But banks and braes, and straths and streams, and woods and waves,
though very dear to memory, merely come up to the painted beauties of
descriptive verse. They must be warmed through
"The dearest theme
That ever waked the poet's dream,"
and love must fill the vision, before the soul can soar above the
delicious but inanimate charms of earth, into the glowing region of
human feeling and passion.
"In peace, Love tunes the shepherd's reed;
In war, he mounts the warrior's steed;
In halls, in gay attire is seen;
In hamlets, dances on the green.
Love rules the court, the camp, the grove,
And man below, and saints above:
For love is heaven, and heaven is love!"
Nor was this essential inspiration wanting in the breast of the young
bard. The climate of Caledonia is cold, but that the hearts of her sons
are susceptible of tropic warmth is shewn by a large proportion of her
lyric treasures. Heroism, pathos, satire, and a peculiar quaint humour,
present little more than an equal division, and the attributes of the
wholly embodied Scottish muse attest the truth of the remark on the
characteristic heat and fire which pervade her population, and excite
them to daring in war and ardour in gentler pursuits. Thus Bennoch sung
his Mary, Jessie, Bessie, Isabel, and other belles, but above all his
Margaret:--
"The moon is shining, Margaret,
Serenely bright above,
And, like my dearest Margaret,
Her every look is love!
The trees are waving, Margaret,
And balmy is the air,
Where flowers are breathing, Margaret,
Come, let us wander there.
Yes! there 's a hand, dear Margaret,
A heart it gives to thee;
When heaven is false, my Margaret,
Then I may faithless be."
In the volume whence the preceding quotations are taken (second edition,
of singular vigour, and slighter touches of genuine poetry. Thus--
"The sea, by day so smooth and bright,
Is far more lovely seen by night,
When o'er old Ocean's wrinkled brow,
The night has hung her silver bow,
And stars in myriads ope their eyes
To guide the footsteps of the wise,
And in the deep reflected lie,
Till Ocean seems a second sky;
And ships, like wing'd aerial cars,
Are voyaging among the stars."
This is--
"Ere winter comes with icy chain,
And clanks his fetters o'er the ground."
The impersonation of Winter himself is very striking--
"Loud, loud were the shouts of his boisterous mirth,
As he scatter'd dismay o'er the smiling earth;
The clouds were rent as the storm was driven;
He howl'd and laugh'd in the face of heaven."
The temperament and inclination cherished by the love of song, naturally
seek the companionship of similar tastes and congenial enjoyments. Thus,
in the midst of the turmoil and distractions of orders and sales,
invoices and shipments, Mr Bennoch has always found leisure to pay his
court to literature, and cultivate the society of those whose talents
adorn it. Conjoined with this, a skilful appreciation of works of art
has led him to intimate relations with many of the leading artists of
our time. The interesting Biography of Haydon affords a glimpse at the
character of some of these relations. Wherever disappointed and however
distressed, poor Haydon "claimed kindred here, and had his claim
allowed." To his mercantile friend in Wood Street he never applied in
vain. To a very considerable extent his troubles were solaced, his
difficulties surmounted, his dark despair changed to golden hope, and
the threat of the gaol brightened into another free effort of genius to
redeem itself from the thralls of law and grinding oppression. Had his
generous friend not been absent from England at the fatal time, it is
very probable that the dreadful catastrophe would have been averted; but
he only landed from the continent to receive the shocking intelligence
that all was over. Friendship could but shed the unavailing tear, but it
did not forget or neglect the dear family interests for which (in some
measure) the despairing sacrifice was made. It is to be hoped that such
an unhappy event has been somewhat compensated by the social intercourse
with talent ever hospitably cherished, not only in his pleasant home in
Blackheath Park, but amid the precious hours that could be snatched from
most active engagements in Wood Street. At either, authors and artists
are constantly met; and the brief snatches alluded to are often so
heartily occupied as to rival, if not surpass, the slower motions of the
more prolonged entertainments. Both may boast of "the feast of reason
and the flow of soul," and a crowning increase to these enjoyments is
derived from the circumstance, that Mr Bennoch's connexions with the
Continent, and more especially with the United States, contribute very
frequently to engraft upon these "re-unions" a variety of eminent
foreigners and intellectual citizens of America. It is a trite saying,
that few men can be good or useful abroad who are not happy at home. Mr
Bennoch has been fortunate in wedded life. She who is the theme of many
of his sweetest and most touching verses, is a woman whom a poet may
love and a wise man consult; in whom the sociable gentleman finds an
ever cheerful companion, and the husband a loving and devoted friend.
Among the latest of Mr Bennoch's movements in literary affairs, may be
mentioned his services on behalf of the late estimable Mary Russell
Mitford. Through his intervention the public was gratified by the issue
of "Atherton," and other tales, and also by a collected edition of her
dramatic works, which she dedicated to him as an earnest of her
affectionate regard.
Mr Bennoch is a member of the Society of Arts, the Royal Society of
Antiquaries, the Royal Society of Literature, and the Scottish Literary
Institute.
William Jerdan, late of the _Literary Gazette_.
If wealth thou art wooing, or title, or fame,
There is that in the doing brings honour or shame;
There is something in running life's perilous race,
Will stamp thee as worthy, or brand thee as base.
Oh, then, be a man--and, whatever betide,
Keep truth thy companion, and honour thy guide.
If a king--be thy kingship right royally shewn,
And trust to thy subjects to shelter thy throne;
Rely not on weapons or armies of might,
But on that which endureth,--laws loving and right.
Though a king, be a man--and, whatever betide,
Keep truth thy companion, and honour thy guide.
If a noble--remember, though ancient thy blood,
The heart truly noble is that which is good;
Should a stain of dishonour encrimson thy brow,
Thou art slave to the peasant that sweats at the plough.
Be noble as man--and, whatever betide,
Keep truth thy companion, and honour thy guide.
If lover or husband--be faithful and kind,
For doubting is death to the sensitive mind;
Love's exquisite passion a breath may destroy;
The sower in faith, reapeth harvests of joy.
Love dignifies man--and, whatever betide,
Keep truth thy companion, and honour thy guide.
If a father--be firm, yet forgiving, and prove
How the child honours him who rebuketh with love.
If rich, or if poor, or whate'er thou may'st be,
Remember the truthful alone are the free.
Erect in thy manhood, whatever betide,
Keep truth thy companion, and honour thy guide.
Then, though sickness may come, or misfortunes may fall,
There is that in thy bosom surviveth them all;
Truth, honour, love, friendship, no tempests can pale,
They are beacons of light in adversity's gale.
Oh, the manlike is godlike--no ill shall betide
While truth 's thy companion, and honour thy guide.
A song, a song, brave hearts, a song,
To the ship in which we ride,
Which bears us along right gallantly,
Defying the mutinous tide.
Away, away, by night and day,
Propelled by steam and wind,
The watery waste before her lies,
And a flaming wake behind.
Then a ho and a hip to the gallant ship
That carries us o'er the sea,
Through storm and foam, to a western home
The home of the brave and free.
With a fearless bound to the depths profound,
She rushes with proud disdain,
While pale lips tell the fears that swell,
Lest she never should rise again.
With a courser's pride she paws the tide,
Unbridled by bit I trow,
While the churlish sea she dashes with glee
In a cataract from her prow.
Then a ho and a hip, &c.
She bears not on board a lawless horde,
Piratic in thought or deed,
Yet the sword they would draw in defence of law,
In the nation's hour of need.
Professors and poets, and merchant men
Whose voyagings never cease;
From shore to shore, the wide world o'er,
Their bonds are the bonds of peace.
Then a ho and a hip, &c.
She boasts the brave, the dutiful,
The aged and the young,
And woman bright and beautiful,
And childhood's prattling tongue.
With a dip and a rise, like a bird she flies,
And we fear not the storm or squall;
For faithful officers rule the helm,
And heaven protects us all.
Then a ho and a hip to the gallant ship
That carries us o'er the sea,
Through storm and foam, to a western home,
The home of the brave and free.
in August 1849.
AIR--_'The Brisk Young Lad.'_
Auld Peter MacGowan cam down the craft,
An' rubbit his han's an' fidged an' laugh't;
O little thought he o' his wrinkled chaft,
When he wanted me to lo'e;
He patted my brow an' smooth'd my chin,
He praised my e'en an' sleek white skin,
Syne fain wad kiss; but the laugh within
Came rattlin' out, I trew.
O sirs, but he was a canty carle,
Wi' rings o' gowd, an' a brooch o' pearl,
An' aye he spoke o' his frien' the Earl,
And thought he would conquer lo'e.
He boasted o' gear an' acres wide,
O' his bawsand youd that I should ride
When I was made his bonny wee bride,
Returning lo'e for lo'e;
That I a lady to kirk should gang,
Ha'e writ my virtues in a sang;
But I snapp'd my thumb, and said, "gae hang,
Gin that's the best ye can do."
O sirs, but he was a silly auld man,
Nae mair he spak' o' his gear an' lan';
An' through the town like lightning ran,
The tale o' auld Peter's lo'e.
An' sae the auld carle spiel'd up the craft,
And raved and stamp'd like ane gane daft,
Till tears trickled owre his burning chaft,
Sin' he couldna win my lo'e.
"Far better be single," the folk a' said,
"Than a warming pan in an auld man's bed;"
He will be cunning wha gars me wed,
Wi' ane that I never can lo'e;
Na, na! he maun be a fine young lad,
A canty lad, an' a dainty lad;
Oh, he maun be a spirited lad,
Wha thinks to win my lo'e.
O what care I where love was born;
I know where oft he lingers,
Till night's black curtain 's drawn aside,
By morning's rosy fingers.
If you would know, come, follow me,
O'er mountain, moss, and river,
To where the Nith and Scar agree
To flow as one for ever.
Pass Kirk-o'-Keir and Clover lea,
Through loanings red with roses;
But pause beside the spreading tree,
That Fanny's bower encloses.
There, knitting in her shady grove,
Sits Fanny singing gaily;
Unwitting of the chains of love,
She 's forging for us daily.
Like light that brings the blossom forth,
And sets the corn a-growing,
Melts icy mountains in the north,
And sets the streams a-flowing;
So Fanny's eyes, so bright and wise,
Shed loving rays to cheer us,
Her absence gives us wintry skies,
'Tis summer when she 's near us!
O, saw ye ever such a face,
To waken love and wonder;
A brow with such an arch of grace,
And blue eyes shining under!
Her snaring smiles, sweet nature's wiles,
Are equall'd not by many;
Her look it charms, her love it warms,
The flower of Keir is Fanny.
Oh! I have traversed lands afar,
O'er mountains high, and prairies green;
Still above me like a star,
Serene and bright thy love has been;
Still above me like a star,
To gladden, guide, and keep me free
From every ill. Oh, life were chill,
Apart, my love, apart from thee.
Other eyes might beam as bright,
And other cheeks as rosy be;
Other arms as pure and white,
And other lips as sweet to pree;
But ruddy lips, or beaming eyes,
However fond and fair to see,
I could not, would not love or prize
Apart, my love, apart from thee.
Other friendships I have known,
Friendships dear, and pure, and kind;
Liking soon to friendship grown,
Love is friendship's ore refined.
Oh, what is life, with love denied?
A scentless flower, a leafless tree;
My song with love,--my love with pride,
Are full,--my love, are full of thee.
My bonnie wee wifie, I 'm waefu' to leave thee,
To leave thee sae lanely, and far frae me;
Come night and come morning, I 'll soon be returning;
Then, oh, my dear wifie, how happy we 'll be!
Oh, cauld is the night, and the way dreigh and dreary,
The snaw 's drifting blindly o'er moorland an' lea;
All nature looks eerie. How can she be cheery,
Since weel she maun ken I am parted frae thee?
Oh, wae is the lammie, that 's lost its dear mammy,
An' waefu' the bird that sits chirping alane;
The plaints they are making, their wee bit hearts breaking,
Are throbbings o' pleasure compared wi' my pain.
The sun to the simmer, the bark to the timmer,
The sense to the soul, an' the light to the e'e,
The bud to the blossom, sae thou 'rt to my bosom;
Oh, wae 's my heart, wifie, when parted frae thee.
There 's nae guid availing in weeping or wailing,
Should friendship be failing wi' fortune's decay;
Love in our hearts glowing, its riches bestowing,
Bequeaths us a treasure life takes not away.
Let nae anxious feeling creep o'er thy heart, stealing
The bloom frae thy cheek when thou 'rt thinking of me;
Come night and come morning, I 'll then be returning;
Nae mair, cozie wifie, we parted shall be.
Oh, where snared ye that bonnie, bonnie bird?
Oh, where wiled ye that winsome fairy?
I fear me it was where nae truth was heard,
And far frae the shrine o' guid St Mary.
I didna snare the bonnie, bonnie bird,
Nor try ony wiles wi' the winsome fairy,
But won her young heart where the angels heard,
In the bowery glen of Inverary.
And what want ye wi' sic a bonnie bird?
I fear me its plumes ye will ruffle sairly;
Or bring it low down to the lane kirkyard,
Where blossoms o' grace are planted early.
As life I love my bonnie, bonnie bird,
Its plumage shall never be ruffled sairly;
To the day o' doom I will keep my word,
An' cherish my bonnie bird late an' early.
Oh, whence rings out that merry, merry peal?
The laugh and the sang are cherish'd rarely;
It is--it is the bonny, bonny bird,
Wi' twa sma' voices a' piping early.
For he didna snare that bonny, bonny bird,
Nor did he beguile the winsome fairy,
He had made her his ain, where the angels heard,
At the holy shrine o' the blest St Mary.
Come when the dawn of the morning is breaking,
Gold on the mountain-tops, mist on the plain,
Come when the clamorous birds are awaking
Man unto duty and pleasure again;
Bright let your spirits be,
Breathing sweet liberty,
Drinking the rapture that gladdens the brain.
High o'er the swelling hills shepherds are climbing,
Down in the meadows the mowers are seen,
Haymakers singing, and village bells chiming;
Lasses and lads lightly trip o'er the green,
Flying, pursuing,
Toying, and wooing--
Nature is now as she ever has been.
Then when the toils of the day are all over,
Gathered, delighted, set round in a ring--
Youth, with its mirthfulness--age, with its cheerfulness,
Brimful of happiness, cheerily sing,
"Bright may our spirits be--
Happy and ever free.
Blest are the joys that from innocence spring."
Good morrow, good morrow! warm, rosy, and bright,
Glow the clouds in the east, laughing heralds of light;
Whilst still as the glorious colours decay,
Full gushes of music seem tracking their way.
Hark! hark!
Is it the sheep-bell among the ling,
Or the early milkmaid carolling?
Hark! hark!
Or is it the lark,
As he bids the sun good-morrow?--
Good-morrow;
Though every day brings sorrow.
The daylight is dying, the night drawing near,
The workers are silent; yet ringing and clear,
From the leafiest tree in the shady bowers,
Comes melody falling in silvery showers.
Hark! hark!
Is it the musical chime on the hill,
That sweetly ringeth when all is still?
Hark! hark!
Oh, sweeter than lark,
Is the nightingale's song of sorrow,
Of sorrow;
But pleasure will come to-morrow.
Russell Mitford and appears in her tale of Atherton. The other stanza
was composed by Mr Bennoch, at the urgent request of his much loved
friend.
Oh, wae's my life, and sad my heart,
The saut tears fill my e'e, Willie,
Nae hope can bloom this side the tomb,
Since ye hae gane frae me, Willie.
O' warl's gear I couldna' boast,
But now I'm poor indeed, Willie;
The last fond hope I leant upon,
Has fail'd me in my need, Willie.
For wealth or fame ye've left your Jean,
Forgat your plighted vow, Willie;
Can honours proud dispel the cloud,
That darkens on your brow, Willie?
Oh, was I then a thing sae mean,
For nought but beauty prized, Willie;
Caress'd a'e day, then flung away,
A fading flower despised, Willie?
Sin' love has fled, and hope is dead,
Soon my poor heart maun break, Willie;
As your ain life, oh, guard your wife--
I 'll love her for your sake, Willie.
Through my despair, oh, mony a prayer,
Will rise for her and ye, Willie;
That ye may prove to her, in love,
Mair faithfu' than to me, Willie.
Hey, my bonnie wee lassie,
Blythe and cheerie wee lassie,
Will ye wed a canty carle,
Bonnie, bonnie wee lassie?
I ha'e sheep, an' I ha'e kye,
I ha'e wheat, an' I ha'e rye,
An' heaps o' siller, lass, forbye,
That ye shall spen' wi' me, lassie!
Hey, my bonnie wee lassie,
Blythe and cheerie wee lassie,
Will ye wed a canty carle,
Bonnie, bonnie wee lassie?
Ye shall dress in damask fine,
My goud and gear shall a' be thine,
And I to ye be ever kin'.
Say,--will ye marry me, lassie?
Hey, my bonnie wee lassie,
Blythe and cheerie wee lassie,
Will ye wed a canty carle,
Bonnie, smiling wee lassie?
Gae hame, auld man, an' darn your hose,
Fill up your lanky sides wi' brose,
An' at the ingle warm your nose;
But come na courtin' me, carle.
Oh, ye tottering auld carle,
Silly, clavering auld carle,
The hawk an' doo shall pair, I trew,
Before I pair wi' ye, carle!
Your heart is cauld an' hard as stanes,
Ye ha'e nae marrow in your banes,
An' siller canna buy the brains
That pleasure gie to me, carle!
Oh, ye tottering auld carle,
Silly, clavering auld carle,
The hound an' hare may seek ae lair,
But I'll no sleep wi' ye, carle.
I winna share your gowd wi' ye,
Your withering heart, an' watery e'e;
In death I'd sooner shrouded be
Than wedded to ye, auld carle!
Oh, ye tottering auld carle,
Silly, clavering auld carle,
When roses blaw on leafs o' snaw,
I'll bloom upon your breast, carle.
But there's a lad, an' I'm his ain,
May heaven blessings on him rain!
Though plackless, he is unco fain,
And he's the man for me, carle!
Oh, youth an' age can ne'er agree;
Though rich, you're no the man for me.
Gae hame, auld carle, prepare to dee;
Pray heaven to be your bride, carle.
Oh, mony a year has come and gane,
An' mony a weary day,
Sin' frae my hame, my mountain hame,
I first was lured away,
To wander over unco lands,
Far, far ayont the sea;
But no to find a land like this,
The hame o' Bess an' me!
I've traversed mony a dreary land,
Across the braid, braid sea;
But, oh, my native mountain hame,
My thochts were aye wi' thee.
As certain as the sun wad rise,
And set ahint the sea,
Sae constant, Bessie, were my prayers,
At morn an' nicht for thee;
When I return'd unto my hame,
The hills were clad wi' snow;
Though they look'd cold and cheerless, love,
My heart was in a glow.
Though keen the wintry north wind blew,
Like summer 'twas to me;
For, Bess, my frame was warm wi' love,
Of country, kindred, thee!
Nae flower e'er hail'd wi' sweeter smiles
Returning sunny beams,
Than I then hailed my native hame,
Its mountains, woods, and streams.
Now we are met, my bonnie Bess,
We never mair will part;
Although to a' we seem as twa,
We only hae ae heart!
We 'll be sae loving a' the nicht,
Sae happy a' the day,
That though our bodies time may change,
Our love shall ne'er decay:
As gently as yon lovely stream
Declining years shall run,
An' life shall pass frae our auld clay,
As snow melts 'neath the sun.
Yestreen on Cample's bonnie flood
The summer moon was shining;
While on a bank in Chrichope wood
Two lovers were reclining:
They spak' o' youth, an' hoary age,
O' time how swiftly fleeting,
Of ilka thing, in sooth, but ane,--
The reason of their meeting!
When Willie thoucht his heart was firm,
An' might declare its feeling,
A glance frae Bessy's starry een
Sent a' his senses reeling;
For aye when he essay'd to speak,
An' she prepared to hear him,
The thought in crimson dyed his cheek,
But words would no come near him!
'Tis ever thus that love is taught
By his divinest teacher;
He silent adoration seeks,
But shuns the prosy preacher.
Now read me right, ye gentle anes,
Nor deem my lesson hollow;
The deepest river silent rins,
The babbling brook is shallow.
Together, dearest, we have play'd,
As girl and boy together;
Through storm and calm, in sun and shade,
In spring and wintry weather.
Oh! every pang that stinging came
But made our love the dearer;
If danger lower'd--'twas all the same,
We only clung the nearer.
In riper years, when all the world
Lay bathed in light before us,
And life in rainbow hues unfurl'd
Its glowing banner o'er us,
Amid the beauty storms would rise
And flowers collapsing wither,
While open friends turned hidden foes--
Yet were we blest together.
But now the battle's fought and won,
And care with life is flying,
While, setting slowly like the sun,
Ambition's fires are dying.
We gather hope with fading strength,
And go, we know not whither,
Contented if in death at last
We sleep in peace together.
With lofty song we love to cheer
The hearts of daring men;
Applauded thus, they gladly hear
The trumpet's call again.
But now we sing of lowly deeds
Devoted to the brave,
Where she, who stems the wound that bleeds,
A hero's life may save:
And heroes saved exulting tell
How well her voice they knew;
How sorrow near it could not dwell,
But spread its wings and flew.
Neglected, dying in despair,
They lay till woman came
To soothe them with her gentle care,
And feed life's flickering flame.
When wounded sore, on fever's rack,
Or cast away as slain,
She called their fluttering spirits back
And gave them strength again.
'Twas grief to miss the passing face
That suffering could dispel;
But joy to turn and kiss the place
When words of wrath profaning rung,
She moved with pitying grace;
Her presence still'd the wildest tongue,
They knew that they were cared for then,
Their eyes forgot their tears;
In dreamy sleep they lost their pain,
And thought of early years--
Of early years, when all was fair,
Of faces sweet and pale.
They woke: the angel bending there
Was--Florence Nightingale!
more, but she could not do it to all; but we could kiss her shadow as it
fell, and lay our heads on the pillow again, content.--_Soldier's Letter
from the Crimea._
was as holy as a church."--_Ibid._
The writer of several good songs, which have been published with music,
Joseph Macgregor, followed the profession of an accountant in Edinburgh.
Expert as a man of business, he negotiated the arrangement of the city
affairs at the period of the municipal bankruptcy. A zealous member of
the Liberal party, he took a prominent interest in the Reform Bill
movement, and afterwards afforded valuable assistance in the election of
Francis Jeffrey as one of the representatives of the city in Parliament.
He latterly occupied Ramsay Lodge, the residence of the poet Allan
Ramsay, where he died about the year 1845, at a somewhat advanced age.
The following songs from his pen are published by the kind permission of
Messrs Robertson & Co., musicsellers, Edinburgh.
Down whar the burnie rins whimplin' and cheery,
When love's star was smilin', I met wi' my dearie;
Ah! vain was its smilin'--she wadna believe me,
But said wi' a saucy air, "Laddie, oh! leave me;
Leave me, leave me, laddie, oh! leave me."
"I 've lo'ed thee o'er truly to seek a new dearie,
I 've lo'ed thee o'er fondly, through life e'er to weary,
I 've lo'ed thee o'er lang, love, at last to deceive thee;
Look cauldly or kindly, but bid me not leave thee;"
Leave thee, leave thee, &c.
"There 's nae ither saft e'e that fills me wi' pleasure,
There 's nae ither rose-lip has half o' its treasure,
There 's nae ither bower, love, shall ever receive me,
Till death break this fond heart--oh! then I maun leave thee;"
Leave thee, leave thee, &c.
The tears o'er her cheeks ran like dew frae red roses;
What hope to the lover one tear-drop discloses!
I kiss'd them, and blest her--at last to relieve me
She yielded her hand, and sigh'd, "Oh! never leave me;"
Leave me, leave me, &c.
AIR--_"Kinloch of Kinloch."_
How blythely the pipe through Glenlyon was sounding,
At morn when the clans to the merry dance hied;
And gay were the love-knots, o'er hearts fondly bounding,
When Ronald woo'd Flora, and made her his bride.
But war's banner streaming soon changed their fond dreaming--
The battle-cry echoed, around and above
Broad claymores were glancing, and war-steeds were prancing;
Up, Ronald! to arms for home and your love.
All was hush'd o'er the hill, where love linger'd despairing,
With her bride-maids still deck'd in their gay festal gear!
And she wept as she saw them fresh garlands preparing,
Which might laurel Love's brow, or be strew'd o'er his bier!
But cheer thee, fond maiden--each wild breeze is laden
With victory's slogan, through mountain and grove;
Where death streams were gushing, and war-steeds were rushing,
Lord Ronald has conquer'd for home and for love!
A native of Dumfries, William Dunbar, received his elementary education
in that town. Having studied at the University of Edinburgh, he was in
vacations of his theological curriculum, and the earlier portion of his
probationary career, he resided chiefly in the Hebrides. At this period
he composed the popular song, entitled, "The Maid of Islay," the heroine
being a Miss Campbell of the island of Islay. In several collections the
song has been erroneously ascribed to Joseph Train. Mr Dunbar was, in
May 1807, ordained to the parish of Applegarth, Dumfriesshire. Long
reputed as one of the most successful cultivators of the honey-bee, Dr
Dunbar was, in 1840, invited to prepare a treatise on the subject for
the entomological series of the "Naturalist's Library." His observations
were published, without his name, in a volume of the series, with the
title, "The Natural History of Bees, comprehending the uses and
economical management of the British and Foreign Honey-Bee; together
with the known wild species. Illustrated by thirty-six plates, coloured
from nature, with portrait and memoir of Huber." The publication has
been pronounced useful to the practical apiarian and a valuable
contribution to the natural history of the honey-bee.
In the fiftieth year of his pastorate, Dr Dunbar enjoys the veneration
of a flock, of whom the majority have been reared under his ministerial
superintendence.
Rising o'er the heaving billow,
Evening gilds the ocean's swell,
While with thee, on grassy pillow,
Solitude! I love to dwell.
Lonely to the sea-breeze blowing,
Oft I chant my love-lorn strain,
To the streamlet sweetly flowing,
Murmur oft a lover's pain.
'Twas for her, the Maid of Islay,
Time flew o'er me wing'd with joy;
'Twas for her, the cheering smile aye
Beam'd with rapture in my eye.
Not the tempest raving round me,
Lightning's flash or thunder's roll;
Not the ocean's rage could wound me,
While her image fill'd my soul.
Farewell, days of purest pleasure,
Long your loss my heart shall mourn!
Farewell, hours of bliss the measure,
Bliss that never can return!
Cheerless o'er the wild heath wand'ring,
Cheerless o'er the wave-worn shore,
On the past with sadness pond'ring,
Hope's fair visions charm no more.
The well known editor of the _Literary Gazette_, William Jerdan, was
born at Kelso, Roxburghshire, on the 16th April 1782. The third son and
seventh child of John Jerdan, a small land proprietor and baron-bailie
under the Duke of Roxburghe, his paternal progenitors owned extensive
possessions in the south-east of Scotland. His mother, Agnes Stuart, a
woman of superior intelligence, claimed descent from the Royal House of
Stuart. Educated at the parochial school of his native town, young
Jerdan entered a lawyer's office, with a view to the legal profession.
Towards literary pursuits his attention was directed through the kindly
intercourse of the Rev. Dr Rutherford, author of the "View of Ancient
History," who then assisted the minister of Kelso, and subsequently
became incumbent of Muirkirk. In 1801 he proceeded to London, where he
was employed as clerk in a mercantile establishment. Returning to
Scotland, he entered the office of a Writer to the Signet; but in 1804
he resumed his connexion with the metropolis. Suffering from impaired
health, he was taken under the care of a maternal uncle, surgeon of the
_Gladiator_ guard-ship. On the recommendation of this relative, he
served as a seaman for a few months preceding February 1806. A third
time seeking the literary world of London, he became reporter to the
_Aurora_, a morning paper, of temporary duration. In January 1807, he
joined the _Pilot_, an evening paper. Subsequently, he was one of the
conductors of the _Morning Post_ and a reporter for the _British