The
Poets' Lincoln
_Selected by_
_With many portraits of Lincoln,
illustrations of events
in his life, etc._
by OSBORN H. OLDROYD
The Editor is most grateful to the various authors who have willingly
given their consent to the use of their respective poems in the
compilation of this volume. It has been a somewhat difficult problem,
not only to select the more appropriate productions, but also to find
the names of their authors, for in his Lincoln collection there are
many hundreds of poems which have appeared from time to time in
magazines, newspapers and other productions, some of which are
accompanied by more than one name as author of the same poem. In a
number of instances it has been difficult to ascertain the name of the
The Editor in particular extends his grateful acknowledgment to the
Houghton Mifflin Company for permission to reprint the "Emancipation
Group" by John G. Whittier; the "Life Mask" by Richard Watson Gilder;
"The Hand of Lincoln" by Clarence Stedman; "Commemoration Ode" by
James Russell Lowell, and the "Gettysburg Address" by Bayard Taylor;
to Charles Scribner's Sons for two "Lincoln" poems by Richard Henry
Stoddard; and to the J. B. Lippincott Company for the poem "Lincoln"
by George Henry Boker.
The Editor is also grateful to Dr. Marion Mills Miller for his
contribution of the introduction and a poem specially written for the
collection, and also for assistance in the editorial work.
No great man has ever been spoken of with such tender expressions of
high regard as has been Abraham Lincoln. Especially is this true of the
tributes of esteem made by the poets to his memory. It is therefore
desirable that these should be preserved for future generations, and at
this time, the fiftieth anniversary of his untimely death, it is
peculiarly proper that they should be presented to the public.
Although they are chiefly the productions of American authors, quite a
number are from the pens of appreciative citizens of other countries.
From the thousand of meritorious poems which have been written about
Lincoln, the compiler, after serious consideration, has selected those
within as appearing to be gems; although there were others which he
would have been glad to include if space permitted.
The poems and illustrations are arranged largely in the chronological
order of their application to the events in the life of Lincoln. The
intense sympathy and warm appreciation portrayed therein for our
Martyred President, as well as their artistic merit assure the poems
a sacred place in the heart of every patriotic American.
The large number of selected portraits and illustrations of events
connected with his life, service, death and burial, with brief
sketches of authors of the following poems, also forms a compilation
of rich material for all readers of Lincoln literature.
The object in publishing this compilation is to assist in preserving
the collection of memorials now contained in the house in which
Lincoln died, 516 Tenth Street, Washington, D. C.
The volume will be sent postpaid by the Editor at the above address,
upon receipt of its price, $1.00.
Washington, D. C., September twelve,
Nineteen hundred and fifteen.
INTRODUCTION--The Poetic Spirit of Lincoln, by Marion Mills
Miller .................................................... v
MY CHILDHOOD'S HOME I SEE AGAIN, by Abraham Lincoln .......... vi
BUT HERE'S AN OBJECT MORE OF DREAD, by Abraham Lincoln ..... viii
OH, WHY SHOULD THE SPIRIT OF MORTAL BE PROUD? By William
Knox ..................................................... ix
SPEECH AT GETTYSBURG (in verse form), by Abraham Lincoln ... xiii
SOLILOQUY OF KING CLAUDIUS, by William Shakespeare ......... xvii
ON THE LIFE-MASK OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN, by Richard Watson
LINCOLN CALLED TO THE PRESIDENCY, by Henry Wilson
GETTYSBURG, by Abraham Lincoln .......................... 100
GETTYSBURG ODE, by Bayard Taylor .............................. 102
LINCOLN'S SECOND INAUGURAL, by Benjamin Franklin Taylor ....... 104
OH, PATIENT EYES! by Herman Hagedorn .......................... 107
ABRAHAM LINCOLN, by Margaret Elizabeth Sangster ............... 109
THE MAN LINCOLN, by Wilbur Dick Nesbit ........................ 113
THE MASTER, by Edwin Arlington Robinson ....................... 116
LINCOLN, by Harriet Monroe .................................... 119
THE EYES OF LINCOLN, by Walt Mason ............................ 121
HE LEADS US STILL, by Arthur Guiterman ........................ 123
LINCOLN, by S. Weir Mitchell .................................. 125
ABRAHAM LINCOLN, by George Alfred Townsend .................... 126
LINCOLN, by Paul Lawrence Dunbar .............................. 128
ABRAHAM LINCOLN, by Alice Cary ................................ 130
ABRAHAM LINCOLN, by Rose Terry Cooke .......................... 132
LINCOLN, by Frederick Lucian Hosmer ........................... 134
ABRAHAM LINCOLN, by Charles Monroe Dickinson .................. 136
SIC SEMPER TYRANNIS! by Robert Leighton ....................... 139
ABRAHAM LINCOLN FOULLY ASSASSINATED, by Tom Taylor ............ 140
LINCOLN AND STANTON, by Marion Mills Miller ................... 146
THE HOUSE WHERE LINCOLN DIED, by Robert Mackay ................ 151
IN TOKEN OF RESPECT, Translation of Latin Verses .............. 152
ENGLAND'S SORROW, from _London Fun_ ........................... 153
THE FUNERAL HYMN OF LINCOLN, by Phineas Densmore Gurley ....... 155
REST, REST FOR HIM, by Harriet McEwen Kimball ................. 157
THE FUNERAL CAR OF LINCOLN, by Richard Henry Stoddard ......... 159
THE DEATH OF LINCOLN, by William Cullen Bryant ................ 161
ODE, by Henry T. Tuckerman .................................... 163
TOLLING, by Lucy Larcom ....................................... 164
REQUIEM OF LINCOLN, by Richard Storrs Willis .................. 167
REQUIEM, by James Nicoll Johnston ............................. 168
SERVICES IN MEMORY OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN, by Oliver Wendell
Holmes .................................................. 170
SPRINGFIELD'S WELCOME TO LINCOLN, by William Allen ............ 173
LINCOLN, by Lucy Hamilton Hooper .............................. 175
LET THE PRESIDENT SLEEP, by James M. Stewart .................. 179
THE CENOTAPH OF LINCOLN, by James Mackay ...................... 181
DEDICATION POEM, by James Judson Lord ......................... 183
THE GRAVE OF LINCOLN, by Edna Dean Proctor .................... 186
COMMEMORATION ODE, by James Russell Lowell .................... 189
AN HORATIAN ODE, by Richard Henry Stoddard .................... 193
O CAPTAIN! MY CAPTAIN! by Walt Whitman ........................ 197
ON THE ASSASSINATION OF LINCOLN, by Henry De Garrs ............ 200
by Emily J. Bugbee ...................................... 201
LINCOLN, 1865, by John Nichol ................................. 204
LINCOLN, by Christopher Pearse Cranch ......................... 206
LINCOLN, by George Henry Boker ................................ 208
ABRAHAM LINCOLN, by Phoebe Cary ............................... 210
LINCOLN, by Charles Graham Halpin ("Miles O'Reilly") .......... 215
ABRAHAM LINCOLN, by Eugene J. Hall ............................ 220
THE TOMB OF LINCOLN, by Samuel Francis Smith .................. 222
LINCOLN, by John Townsend Trowbridge .......................... 227
HOMAGE DUE TO LINCOLN, by Kinahan Cornwallis .................. 229
THE SCOTLAND STATUE, by David K. Watson ....................... 231
THE UNFINISHED WORK, by Joseph Fulford Folsom ................. 234
ONE OF OUR PRESIDENTS, by Wendell Philips Stafford ............ 236
ON A BRONZE MEDAL OF LINCOLN, by Frank Dempster Sherman ....... 239
by Ella Wheeler Wilcox .................................. 241
THE LINCOLN BOULDER, by Louis Bradford Couch .................. 243
WHEN LINCOLN DIED, by James Arthur Edgerton ................... 247
HAD LINCOLN LIVED, by Amos Russell Wells ...................... 250
LET HIS MONUMENT RISE, by Samuel Green Wheeler Benjamin ....... 253
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Brady, 1864 ....... _Frontispiece_
LINCOLN, from a Bust by Johannes Gelert ........................ iv
THE LOG CABIN, Birthplace of Lincoln ........................... 13
THE BOY LINCOLN, by Eastman Johnson ............................ 30
LINCOLN THE LAWYER, from an Ambrotype, 1856 .................... 34
LINCOLN AS A CANDIDATE FOR UNITED STATES SENATOR, from an
Ambrotype by Gilmer, 1858 ................................ 40
LINCOLN AT THE TIME OF DEBATE WITH DOUGLAS, from an Ambrotype,
THE LINCOLN LIFE-MASK, by Leonard W. Volk ...................... 44
THE HAND OF LINCOLN, a Cast by Leonard W. Volk ................. 46
THE "WIGWAM," Convention Hall in Chicago, 1860 ................. 50
LINCOLN AS CANDIDATE FOR PRESIDENT, from an Ambrotype, 1860 .... 52
"HONEST ABE," Campaign Cartoon of 1860 ......................... 55
LINCOLN AS CANDIDATE FOR PRESIDENT, Photograph by Hesler,
Chicago, 1860 ............................................ 58
LINCOLN AS CANDIDATE FOR PRESIDENT, Photograph at
Springfield, Ill., 1860 .................................. 60
CABIN OF LINCOLN'S PARENTS, on Goose-Nest Prairie, Ill. ........ 62
LINCOLN HOMESTEAD, Springfield, Ill., 1861 ..................... 64
JOHN HAY, Photograph at Springfield, Ill., 1861 .......... 67
LINCOLN IN 1858, Photograph by S. M. Fassett, Chicago .......... 71
THE CAPITOL, at Second Inauguration of Lincoln ................. 73
WHERE LINCOLN WORSHIPPED, New York Avenue Presbyterian Church,
Washington, D. C. ........................................ 79
LINCOLN IN 1858, Photograph Owned by Stuart Brown,
Springfield, Ill. ........................................ 82
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph Autographed for Miss Speed ....... 84
LINCOLN IN FEBRUARY, 1860, Photograph by Brady ................. 86
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Gardner ....................... 88
EMANCIPATION GROUP, in Park Square, Boston ..................... 90
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Brady, 1863 ................... 93
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Gardner, 1863 ................. 95
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Brady ......................... 97
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Brady ........................ 106
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Brady ........................ 108
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Gardner, 1864 ................ 112
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Gardner, 1864 ................ 118
PRESIDENT-ELECT LINCOLN, Photograph at Springfield, Ill.,
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Brady, 1862 .................. 122
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Brady, 1864 .................. 124
STATUE OF LINCOLN in Hodgenville, Ky.; Adolph A. Weinman,
sculptor ................................................ 126
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Brady, 1864 .................. 128
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Gardner, 1865 ................ 130
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Gardner, 1865 ................ 132
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Brady, 1865 .................. 134
Cartoon in London _Punch_ ............................... 140
THE FUNERAL OF LINCOLN, in East Room of White House ........... 154
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Brady, 1863 .................. 170
LINCOLN HOMESTEAD, May 4, 1865 ................................ 172
LINCOLN MONUMENT, in Springfield, Ill., Larken G. Mead,
Architect ............................................... 182
STATUE OF LINCOLN, Lincoln Park, Washington, D. C.,
Thomas Ball, sculptor ................................... 188
STATUE OF LINCOLN, by Leonard W. Volk ......................... 192
"THE GOOD GRAY POET" (Walt Whitman) ........................... 196
STATUE OF LINCOLN, in Washington, D. C.; Lott Flannery,
sculptor ................................................ 199
STATUE OF LINCOLN, in Muskegon, Mich.; Charles Niehaus,
sculptor ................................................ 203
LINCOLN AND CABINET ("First Reading of Emancipation
Proclamation"), Painted by Frank B. Carpenter ........... 206
STATUE OF LINCOLN, in Fairmount Park, Philadelphia, Randolph
Rogers, sculptor ........................................ 208
PRESIDENT LINCOLN, Photograph by Brady, 1864 .................. 210
STATUE OF LINCOLN, in Lincoln Park, Chicago; Augustus Saint
Gaudens, sculptor ....................................... 214
STATUE OF LINCOLN, in Rotunda of Capitol; Vinnie Ream,
sculptor ................................................ 222
STATUE OF LINCOLN, in Lincoln, Neb.; Daniel Chester French,
sculptor ................................................ 226
STATUE OF LINCOLN, in Burlington, Wis.; George E. Ganiere,
sculptor ................................................ 228
STATUE OF LINCOLN, in Edinburgh, Scotland; George E. Bissell,
sculptor ................................................ 231
STATUE OF LINCOLN, in Newark, N. J.; Gutzon Borglum,
sculptor ................................................ 234
HEAD OF LINCOLN, Bronze Medallion in Commemoration of Lincoln
Centenary, Struck for the Grand Army of the Republic .... 238
MARBLE HEAD OF LINCOLN, in Statuary Hall, Capitol; Gutzon
Borglum, sculptor ....................................... 240
THE LINCOLN BOULDER, at Nyack, N. Y. .......................... 243
BAS-RELIEF HEAD OF LINCOLN, James W. Tuft, sculptor ........... 246
A STUDY OF LINCOLN, Painting by Blendon Campbell .............. 249
THE LINCOLN MEMORIAL, at Washington, D. C., Henry Bacon,
architect ............................................... 252
By MARION MILLS MILLER
(See biographical sketch on page 146)
Some years ago, while editing Henry C. Whitney's "Life of Lincoln" I
showed a photograph of the bust of Lincoln by Johannes Gelert, the most
intellectual to my mind of all the studies of his face, to a little
Italian shoeblack, and asked him if he knew who it was. The boy,
evidently prompted by a recent lesson at school, said questioningly,
"Whittier?--Longfellow?" I replied, "No, it is Lincoln, the great
President." He answered, "Well, he looks like a poet, anyway."
This verified a conclusion to which I had already come: Lincoln, had
he lived in a region of greater culture, such as New England, might
not have adopted the engrossing pursuits of law and politics, but, as
did Whittier, have remained longer on the farm and gradually taken up
the calling of letters, composing verse of much the same order as our
Yankee bards', and poetry of even higher merit than some produced.
It is not generally known that Lincoln, shortly before he went to
Congress, wrote verse of a kind to compare favorably with the early
attempts of American poets such as those named. Thus the two poems of
his which have been preserved, for his early lampoons on his neighbors
have happily been lost, are equal in poetic spirit and metrical art to
Whittier's "The Prisoner for Debt," to which they are strikingly
similar in melancholic mood.
In 1846, at the age of 37, Lincoln conducted a literary correspondence
with a friend, William Johnson by name, of like poetic tastes. In
April of this year he wrote the following letter to Johnson:
Tremont, April 18, 1846.
FRIEND JOHNSTON: Your letter, written some six weeks since,
was received in due course, and also the paper with the
parody. It is true, as suggested it might be, that I have
never seen Poe's "Raven"; and I very well know that a parody
is almost entirely dependent for its interest upon the
reader's acquaintance with the original. Still there is
enough in the polecat, self-considered, to afford one
several hearty laughs. I think four or five of the last
stanzas are decidedly funny, particularly where Jeremiah
"scrubbed and washed, and prayed and fasted."
I have not your letter now before me; but, from memory, I
think you ask me who is the author of the piece I sent you,
and that you do so ask as to indicate a slight suspicion
that I myself am the author. Beyond all question, I am not
the author. I would give all I am worth, and go in debt, to
be able to write so fine a piece as I think that is. Neither
do I know who is the author. I met it in a straggling form
in a newspaper last summer, and I remember to have seen it
once before, about fifteen years ago, and this is all I know
about it.
The piece of poetry of my own which I alluded to, I was led
to write under the following circumstances. In the fall of
Indiana for Mr. Clay, I went into the neighborhood in that
State in which I was raised, where my mother and only sister
were buried, and from which I had been absent about fifteen
years.
That part of the country is, within itself, as unpoetical as
any spot of the earth; but still, seeing it and its objects
and inhabitants aroused feelings in me which were certainly
poetry; though whether my expression of those feelings is
poetry is quite another question. When I got to writing,
the change of subject divided the thing into four little
divisions or cantos, the first only of which I send you now,
and may send the others hereafter.
Yours truly,
My childhood's home I see again,
And sadden with the view;
And still, as memory crowds my brain,
There's pleasure in it too.
O Memory! thou midway world
'Twixt earth and paradise,
Where things decayed and loved ones lost
In dreamy shadows rise,
And, freed from all that's earthly vile,
Seem hallowed, pure and bright,
Like scenes in some enchanted isle
All bathed in liquid light.
As dusky mountains please the eye
When twilight chases day;
As bugle-notes that, passing by,
In distance die away;
As leaving some grand waterfall,
We, lingering, list its roar--
So memory will hallow all
We've known but know no more.
Near twenty years have passed away
Since here I bid farewell
To woods and fields, and scenes of play,
And playmates loved so well.
Where many were, but few remain
Of old familiar things;
But seeing them to mind again
The lost and absent brings.
The friends I left that parting day,
How changed, as time has sped!
Young childhood grown, strong manhood gray;
And half of all are dead.
I hear the loved survivors tell
How nought from death could save,
Till every sound appears a knell,
And every spot a grave.
I range the fields with pensive tread,
And pace the hollow rooms,
And feel (companion of the dead)
I'm living in the tombs.
In September he wrote the following letter:
Springfield, September 6, 1846.
FRIEND JOHNSTON: You remember when I wrote you from Tremont
last spring, sending you a little canto of what I called
poetry, I promised to bore you with another some time. I now
fulfil the promise. The subject of the present one is an
insane man; his name is Matthew Gentry. He is three years
older than I, and when we were boys we went to school
together. He was rather a bright lad, and the son of the
rich man of a very poor neighborhood. At the age of
nineteen he unaccountably became furiously mad, from which
condition he gradually settled down into harmless insanity.
When, as I told you in my other letter, I visited my old
home in the fall of 1844, I found him still lingering in
this wretched condition. In my poetizing mood, I could not
forget the impression his case made upon me. Here is the
result:
But here's an object more of dread
Than aught the grave contains--
A human form with reason fled,
While wretched life remains.
When terror spread, and neighbors ran
Your dangerous strength to bind,
And soon, a howling, crazy man,
Your limbs were fast confined;
How then you strove and shrieked aloud,
Your bones and sinews bared;
And fiendish on the gazing crowd
With burning eyeballs glared;
And begged and swore, and wept and prayed,
With maniac laughter joined;
How fearful were these signs displayed
By pangs that killed the mind!
And when at length the drear and long
Time soothed thy fiercer woes,
How plaintively thy mournful song
Upon the still night rose!
I've heard it oft as if I dreamed,
Far distant, sweet and lone,
The funeral dirge it ever seemed
Of reason dead and gone.
To drink its strains I've stole away,
All stealthily and still,
Ere yet the rising god of day
Had streaked the eastern hill.
Air held her breath; trees with the spell
Seemed sorrowing angels round,
Whose swelling tears in dewdrops fell
Upon the listening ground.
But this is past, and naught remains
That raised thee o'er the brute:
Thy piercing shrieks and soothing strains
Are like, forever mute.
Now fare thee well! More thou the cause
Than subject now of woe.
All mental pangs by time's kind laws
Hast lost the power to know.
O death! thou awe-inspiring prince
That keepst the world in fear,
Why dost thou tear more blest ones hence,
And leave him lingering here?
If I should ever send another, the subject will be a "Bear
Hunt."
Yours as ever,
The poem alluded to in the first letter is undoubtedly "Oh, Why Should
the Spirit of Mortal Be Proud?", by William Knox, a Scottish poet,
known to fame only by its authorship. It remained the favorite of
Lincoln until his death, being frequently alluded to by him in
conversation with his friends. Because it so aptly presents Lincoln's
own spirit it is here presented in full. During his Presidency he
said:
"There is a poem which has been a great favorite with me for
years, which was first shown me when a young man by a friend,
and which I afterwards saw and cut from a newspaper and
learned by heart. I would give a good deal to know who wrote
it, but I have never been able to ascertain."
Then, half closing his eyes, he repeated the verses:
By WILLIAM KNOX.
William Knox was born at Firth, in the parish of
Lilliesleaf, in the county of Roxburghshire, on the 17th of
August, 1789. From his early youth he composed verses. He
merited the attention of Sir Walter Scott, who afforded him
pecuniary assistance. He died November 12, 1825, at the age
of thirty-six.
Oh! why should the spirit of mortal be proud?
Like a swift-flitting meteor, a fast-flying cloud,
The flash of the lightning, a break of the wave,
He passes from life to his rest in the grave.
The leaves of the oak and the willow shall fade,
Be scattered around and together be laid;
And the young and the old, and the low and the high
Shall molder to dust and together shall lie.
The infant a mother attended and loved,
The mother that infant's affection who proved,
The husband that mother and infant who blest,
Each, all, are away to their dwellings of rest.
The maid on whose cheek, on whose brow, in whose eye,
Shone beauty and pleasure, her triumphs are by;
And the mem'ry of those who loved her and praised
Are alike from the minds of the living erased.
The hand of the king that the scepter hath borne,
The brow of the priest that the miter hath worn,
The eye of the sage and the heart of the brave
Are hidden and lost in the depths of the grave.
The peasant whose lot was to sow and to reap,
The herdsman who climbed with his goats up the steep,
The beggar who wandered in search of his bread,
Have faded away like the grass that we tread.
The saint who enjoyed the communion of heaven,
The sinner who dared to remain unforgiven,
The wise and the foolish, the guilty and just,
Have quietly mingled their bones in the dust.
So the multitude goes like the flower or the weed
That withers away to let others succeed,
So the multitude comes, even those we behold,
To repeat every tale that has often been told.
For we are the same that our fathers have been;
We see the same sights our fathers have seen;
We drink the same streams, and view the same sun,
And run the same course our fathers have run.
The thoughts we are thinking our fathers would think,
From the death we are shrinking our fathers would shrink;
To the life we are clinging they also would cling,
But it speeds from us all like a bird on the wing.
They loved, but the story we cannot unfold;
They scorned, but the heart of the haughty is cold;
They grieved, but no wail from their slumber will come;
They joyed, but the tongue of their gladness is dumb.
They died, ay, they died. We things that are now,
That walk on the turf that lies over their brow,
And make in their dwellings a transient abode,
Meet the things that they met on their pilgrimage road.
Yea, hope and despondency, pleasure and pain,
Are mingled together in sunshine and rain:
And the smile and the tear, the song and the dirge,
Still follow each other like surge upon surge.
'Tis the wink of an eye, 'tis the draught of a breath,
From the blossom of health to the paleness of death,
From the gilded salon to the bier and the shroud,--
Oh, why should the spirit of mortal be proud?
"The Last Leaf," by Oliver Wendell Holmes, was also a favorite poem of
Lincoln, says Henry C. Whitney, his friend and biographer (in his
"Life of Lincoln," Vol. I, page 238):
"Over and over again I have heard him repeat:
The mossy marbles rest
On the lips that he has prest
In their bloom;
And the names he loved to hear
Have been carved for many a year
On the tomb.
and tears would come unbidden to his eyes, probably at thought of the
grave (his mother's) at Gentryville, or that in the bend of the
Sangamo" (of Ann Rutledge, his first love, who died shortly before the
time set for their wedding, and whose memory Lincoln ever kept
sacred).
While Lincoln, so far as can be ascertained, wrote nothing in verse
after 1846, he developed in his speeches a literary style which is
poetical in the highest sense of that term. More than all American
statesmen his utterances and writings possess that classic quality
whose supreme expression is found in Greek literature. This is because
Lincoln had an essentially Hellenic mind. First of all the
architecture of his thought was that of the Greek masters, who,
whether as Phidias they built the Parthenon to crown with harmonious
beauty the Acropolis, or as Homer they recorded in swelling narrative
from its dramatic beginning the strife of the Achaeans before Troy, or
even as Euclid, they developed from postulates the relations of space,
had a deep insight into the order in which mother nature was striving
to express herself, and a reverent impulse to aid her in bodying forth
according to her methods the ideal forms of the cosmos, the world of
beauty, no less within the soul of man than without it, which was
intended by such help to be realized as a whole in the infinity of
time, and in part in the vision of every true workman. In short,
Lincoln had a profound sense of the fitness of things, that which
Aristotle, the scientific analyst of human thought and the philosopher
of its proper expression, called "poetic justice." He strove to make
his reasoning processes strictly logical, and to this end carried with
him as he rode the legal circuit not law-books, but a copy of Euclid's
geometry, and passed his time on the way demonstrating to his drivers
the theorems therein proposed. "Demonstrate" he said he considered to
be the greatest word in the English language. He constructed every one
of his later speeches on the plan of a Euclidean solution. His Cooper
Union speech on "Slavery as the Fathers Viewed It," which contributed
so largely to his Presidential nomination, was such a demonstration,
settling what was thereafter never attempted to be controverted: his
contention that the makers of the Constitution merely tolerated
property in human flesh and blood as a primitive and passing phase of
civilization, and never intended that it should be perpetuated by the
charter of the Republic.
So, too, the Gettysburg speech, brief as it is, is the statement of a
thesis, the principles upon which the Fathers founded the nation, and
of the heroic demonstration of the same by the soldiers fallen on the
field, and the addition of a moral corollary of this, the high resolve
of the living to prosecute the work until the vision of the Fathers
was realized.
In substance of thought and in form of its presentation the speech is
as perfect a poem as ever was written, and even in the minor qualities
of artistic language--rhythm and cadence, phonetic euphony, rhetorical
symbolism, and that subtle reminiscence of a great literary and
spiritual inheritance, the Bible, which stands to us as Homer did to
the ancients--it excels the finest gem to be found in poetic cabinets
from the Greek Anthology downward. Only because it was not written in
the typography of verse, with capitalized and paragraphed initial
words at the beginning of each thought-group of words, has it failed
of recognition as a poem by academic minds. Had Walt Whitman composed
the address, and printed it in the above manner, it would now appear
in every anthology of poetry published since its date. To convince of
this those conventional people who must have an ocular demonstration
of form in order to compare the address with accepted examples of
poetry, I will dare to incur the condemnation of those who rightly
look upon such a departure from Lincoln's own manner of writing the
speech as profanation, and present it in the shape of _vers libre_.
For the latter class of readers this, the greatest poem by Lincoln,
the greatest, indeed, yet produced in America, may be preferably read
in the original form on page 100 of this collection. I trust that
these, especially if they are teachers of literature, will pardon, for
the sake of others less cultivated in poetic taste, what may appear a
duplication here, unnecessary to themselves, of the address.
By ABRAHAM LINCOLN
Four score and seven years ago
Our fathers brought forth on this continent
A new nation,
Conceived in liberty,
And dedicated to the proposition
That all men are created equal.
Now we are engaged in a great civil war,
Testing whether that nation,
Or any nation so conceived and so dedicated,
Can long endure.
We are met on a great battle-field of that war.
We have come to dedicate a portion of that field
As a final resting-place
For those who here gave their lives
That that nation might live.
It is altogether fitting and proper
That we should do this.
But, in a larger sense,
We cannot dedicate--
We cannot consecrate--
We cannot hallow--
This ground.
The brave men, living and dead,
Who struggled here,
Have consecrated it far above our poor power
To add or detract.
The world will little note nor long remember
What we say here,
But it can never forget
What they did here.
It is for us, the living, rather,
To be dedicated here to the unfinished work
Which they who fought here have so nobly advanced.
It is rather for us to be here dedicated
To the great task remaining before us--
That from these honored dead
We take increased devotion to that cause
For which they gave the last full measure of devotion;
That we here highly resolve
That these dead shall not have died in vain;
That this nation, under God,
Shall have a new birth of freedom;
And that government of the people,
By the people, and for the people
Shall not perish from the earth.
Lincoln attained this classic perfection of ordered thought, and with
it, as an inevitable accompaniment this classic beauty of expression,
only by great struggle. He became a poet of the first rank only by
virtue of his moral spirit. He was continually correcting deficiencies
in his character, which were far greater than is generally received,
owing to the tendency of American historians of the tribe of Parson
Weems to find by force illustrations of moral heroism in the youth of
our great men. Thus Lincoln is represented as a noble lad, who, having
allowed a borrowed book to be ruined by rain, went to the owner and
offered to "pull fodder" to repay him, which the man ungenerously
permitted him to do. The truth is, that the neighbor, to whom the book
was a cherished possession, required him to do the work in repayment,
and that Lincoln not only did it grudgingly, but afterwards lampooned
the man so severely in satiric verse that he was ashamed to show himself
at neighborhood gatherings. All the people about Gentryville feared
Lincoln's caustic wit, and disliked him for it, although they were
greatly impressed with his ability exhibited thereby. Lincoln recognized
his moral obliquity, and curbed his propensity for satire, which was a
case of that "exercise of natural faculty" which affects all gifted
persons. And when he left that region he visited all the neighbors, and
asked pardon of those whom he had ridiculed. The true Lincoln is a far
better example to boys than the fictitious one, in that he had more
unlovely traits at first than the average lad, yet he reformed, with the
result that, when he went to new scenes, he speedily became the most
popular young man in the neighborhood. He was one of those who
"rise on stepping stones
Of their dead selves to higher things."
The reformation of his character by self examination and determination
not to make the same mistake again seems to have induced similar
effects and methods for their attainment in the case of his
intellectual development. Whatever the connection, both regenerations
proceeded apace. Lincoln at first was a shallow thinker, accepting
without examination the views of others, especially popular statesmen,
such as Henry Clay, whose magnetic personality was drawing to himself
the high-spirited young men of the West. Some of the political
doctrines which Lincoln then adopted he retained to the end, these
being on subjects such as taxation and finance whose moral bearing was
not apparent, and therefore into which he never inquired closely, for
Lincoln's mind could not be profoundly interested in any save a moral
question. When he found that a revered statesman was weak upon a
crucial moral issue, he repressed his innate tendency to loyalty and
rejected him. Thus, after a visit to Henry Clay in Kentucky, when the
slavery question was arising to vex the country despite the efforts
the aged statesman had made to settle it by the compromise of 1850,
Lincoln returned disillusioned, having found that the light he himself
possessed on the subject was clearer than that of his old leader. The
eulogy which he delivered on the death of Clay, which occurred shortly
afterward (in 1852), is the most perfunctory of all his addresses.
Indeed, not till the time of the Repeal of the Missouri Compromise of
what he regarded as the constitutional exclusion of slavery from the
Territories, did he rise to his highest powers as a thinker and
speaker. Lincoln had been defeated for reelection to Congress because
of his opposition, though not highly moral in character, to the
popular Mexican war, and, regarding himself as a political failure, he
had devoted himself to law. His most notable speech in the House of
Representatives, a well composed satirical arraignment of President
Polk for throwing the country into war, had failed utterly of its
intended effect, probably because of its trimming partisan tone. In
to smash. Anti-slavery had become a great moral movement, and he was
drawn into its current. Almost at once he became its Western leader.
His speech against the Repeal of the Missouri Compromise which had
been effected by his inveterate antagonist, Senator Stephen A.
Douglas, was his first classic achievement in argumentative oratory.
While in the greater aspect of artistic composition, the form of the
address as a whole, his master was Euclid, in minor points the
influence of Shakespeare, of whom Lincoln had become a great reader,
was apparent, as indicated by a quotation from the dramatist, and an
application to Senator Douglas of the scene of Lady Macbeth trying to
wash out the indelible stain upon her hand. Also the Bible was the
source of strong and telling phrases and figures of speech. Thus he
denominated slavery as "the great Behemoth of danger," and asked,
"shall the strong grip of the nation be loosened upon him, to intrust
him to the hands of his feeble keepers?"
And, in the following passage, characteristic of the new Lincoln, I
think that either Shakespeare and the Bible had combined to inspire
him with graphic description of character and moral indignation, or
they enforced these native powers.
"Again, you have among you a sneaking individual of the class of
native tyrants known as the 'Slave-Dealer'. He watches your
necessities, and crawls up to buy your slave at a speculative price.
If you cannot help it, you sell to him; but if you can help it, you
drive him from your door. You despise him utterly. You do not
recognize him as a friend, or even as an honest man. Your children
must not play with his; they may rollick freely with the little
negroes, but not with the slave-dealer's children. If you are obliged
to deal with him you try to get through the job without so much as
touching him. It is common with you to join hands with the men you
meet, but with the slave-dealer you avoid the ceremony--instinctively
shrinking from the snaky contact."
Of Lincoln's critical appreciation of Shakespeare Frank B. Carpenter,
the artist of the "First Reading of the Emancipation Proclamation"
(see illustration on page 206), writes in his "Six Months at the White
House with Abraham Lincoln" as follows:
"Presently the conversation turned upon Shakspeare, of whom it is well
known Mr. Lincoln was very fond. He once remarked, 'It matters not to
me whether Shakspeare be well or ill acted; with him the thought
suffices.' Edwin Booth was playing an engagement at this time at
Grover's Theatre. He had been announced for the coming evening in his
famous part of _Hamlet_. The President had never witnessed his
representation of this character, and he proposed being present. The
mention of this play, which I afterward learned had at all times a
peculiar charm for Mr. Lincoln's mind, waked up a train of thought I
was not prepared for. Said he,--and his words have often returned to
me with a sad interest since his own assassination,--'There is one
passage of the play of "Hamlet" which is very apt to be slurred over
by the actor, or omitted altogether, which seems to me the choicest
part of the play. It is the soliloquy of the King, after the murder.
It always struck me as one of the finest touches of nature in the
world.'
"Then, throwing himself into the very spirit of the scene, he took
up the words:--
"'O my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
It hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
A brother's murder!--Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharp as will;
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent;
And, like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
But to confront the visage of offence;
And what's in prayer but this twofold force--
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
Or pardoned, being down? Then I'll look up;
My fault is past. But O what form of prayer
Can serve my turn? Forgive me my foul murder?--
That cannot be; since I am still possessed
Of those effects for which I did the murder,--
My crown, my own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardoned and retain the offence?
In the corrupted currents of this world,
Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law; but 'tis not so _above_.
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
In its true nature; and we ourselves compelled,
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can; what can it not?
Yet what can it when one cannot repent?
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
O bruised soul that, struggling to be free,
Art more engaged! Help, angels, make assay!
Bow, stubborn knees! And heart with strings of steel,
Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe;
All may be well!'
"He repeated this entire passage from memory, with a feeling and
appreciation unsurpassed by anything I ever witnessed upon the stage.
Remaining in thought for a few moments, he continued:--
"'The opening of the play of "King Richard the Third" seems to me often
entirely misapprehended. It is quite common for an actor to come upon
the stage, and, in a sophomoric style, to begin with a flourish:--
"'Now is the winter of our discontent
Made glorious summer by this sun of York,
And all the clouds that lowered upon our house,
In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.'
"'Now,' said he, 'this is all wrong. Richard, you remember, had been,
and was then plotting the destruction of his brothers, to make room
for himself. Outwardly, the most loyal to the newly crowned king,
secretly he could scarcely contain his impatience at the obstacles
still in the way of his own elevation. He appears upon the stage, just
after the crowning of Edward, burning with repressed hate and
jealousy. The prologue is the utterance of the most intense bitterness
and satire.' Then, unconsciously assuming the character, Mr. Lincoln
repeated, also from memory, Richard's soliloquy, rendering it with a
degree of force and power that made it seem like a new creation to me.
Though familiar with the passage from boyhood, I can truly say that
never till that moment had I fully appreciated its spirit. I could not
refrain from laying down my palette and brushes, and applauding
heartily upon his conclusion, saying, at the same time, half in
earnest, that I was not sure but that he had made a mistake in the
choice of a profession, considerably, as may be imagined, to his
amusement. Mr. Sinclair has since repeatedly said to me that he never
heard these choice passages of Shakspeare rendered with more effect by
the most famous of modern actors."
Lincoln's sense of the classic phrase seems to have been native with
him, for we find it in his earliest utterances. Such a phrase appears
in homely proverbial form in his first speech: "My politics are short
and sweet, like the old woman's dance." Impaired in rhythm of thought
and sound by an awkward, though logical, parenthetical expression,
another phrase stands out in a "spread-eagle" passage from his first
formal address, that on "The Perpetuation of Our Political
Institutions."
"All the armies of Europe, Asia, and Africa combined, with all the
treasure of earth (our own excepted) in its military chest, with a
Bonaparte for a commander, could not by force _take a drink from the
Ohio or make a track on the Blue Ridge_ in a trial of a thousand
years."
And in a eulogy on Washington, Lincoln early achieved a line which in
phonetic quality, rhetorical figure and rhythmic cadence is pure
poetry, though not of an exceptional order.
"In solemn awe we pronounce the name, and in its naked deathless
splendor leave it shining on."
In an article entitled "Lincoln's Literary Experiments," by John G.
Nicolay, one of Lincoln's two private secretaries, which was published
in the Century Magazine for April, 1894, are reproduced Lincoln's
notes of one lyceum lecture on "Niagara Falls," and the text of
another on "Discoveries, Inventions and Improvements." These, however,
detract, if anything, from Lincoln's reputation as a writer, for in
choice of subjects and in style of treatment there is seen an almost
discreditable stooping of a man of genius, even in his function of
teacher, to the low popular taste of the West at the time. In the
first lecture Lincoln presented the statistics of the water power of
Niagara Falls for each minute, and led his hearers from this base to
the "contemplation of the vast power the sun is constantly exerting in
the quiet noiseless operation of lifting water up to be rained down
again." Yet at this point he stopped short of his duty as an educator,
for he made no suggestion as to the utilization of this power. He was
satisfied with giving the people what they had come for--the pleasant
excitation of a mental faculty, that of the imagination in its primary
form of wonder at the grandeur of the material universe. In short, he
was acting as a mere entertainer--as so many of our public men do now
at "Chautauquas."
In the second lecture he performed this function in a still more
discreditable manner, by catering to the unworthy demand of his
hearers for obvious and familiar humorous conceptions to grasp which
would cause them no mental exertion. Thus, in speaking of the
inventions of the locomotive and telegraph, already old enough for the
first inevitable similitudes and jocose remarks about them to be
current, he said:
"The iron horse is panting and impatient to carry him (man) everywhere
in no time; and the lightning stands ready harnessed to take and bring
his tidings in a trifle less than no time."
This reveals Lincoln's taste for the characteristic American humor of
exaggeration, which was later to afford him relief from the stress and
strain of his duties as President in the works of "Petroleum V. Nasby"
and "Artemus Ward," writers, however, with a quaint originality which
lifted them and their admirers above the plane of humorous composition
and appreciation of the preceding decade. Indeed, Lincoln developed
his own power of witty expression to a degree excelling that of the
writers he admired, and in quality of product, if not in quantity (for
the greater part of the "funny stories" attributed to him, thank
heaven, are apocryphal) he stands in the front rank of the American
humorists of his generation.
And as the poet and the wit are near akin through this common appeal
to the imagination, Lincoln, had he overcome the obsession of
melancholy in his nature which was the mood in which he resorted to
poetry, and which early limited his taste for it to verse of a sad and
reflective kind, might have become a literary craftsman of the order
of Holmes, whose poetry in the main was bright and joyous, and, even
when he occasionally touched upon such subjects as death, was, as we
have seen, informed with inspiring Hellenic beauty rather than
depressing Hebraic moralization. It was in his sad moments, says Henry
C. Whitney, that the mind of Lincoln "gravitated toward the weird,
sombre and mystical. In his normal and tranquil state of mind, 'The
Last Leaf,' by Oliver Wendell Holmes, was his favorite" (poem). It was
Lincoln's happy lot to rise in the realm of oratory by the power of
his poetic spirit higher than any American, save probably Emerson, has
done in other fields of literature. On the theme of slavery, where his
unerring moral sense had free sway, he became our supreme orator,
transcending even Webster in grandeur of thought and beauty of its
expression. His periods are not as sonorous as the Olympian New
England orator's, but their accents will reach as far and resound even
longer by the carrying and sustaining power of the ideas which they
express. Indeed, it is on the wings supplied by Lincoln that Webster's
most significant conception, that of the nature of the Constitution,
is even now borne along, because of the uplifting ideality which
Lincoln gave it by more broadly applying it to the nation itself as an
examplar and preserver to the world of ideal government.
Webster said: "It is, sir, the people's Constitution, the people's
Government; made for the people; made by the people; and answerable to
the people."
This he made the thesis for an argument which was to be followed by a
magnificent peroration ending with a sentiment, calculated for use as
a toast at political banquets, and as a patriotic slogan: "Liberty and
Union, now and forever, one and inseparable!"
Lincoln with purer taste, the expression of which, be it said to
Webster's credit, had been made possible by the acceptance of the
earlier statesman's contention, assumed the thesis as placed beyond
all controversy, and, making it the exhortation of his speech, gave
to it the character of a sacred adjuration: "That we here highly
resolve ... that government of the people, by the people, and for
the people, shall not perish from the earth."
Another example of Lincoln's ability to improve the composition of
another writer is the closing paragraph of his first inaugural
address. The President-elect had submitted the manuscript of this most
important speech, which would be universally scrutinized to find what
policy he would adopt toward the seceded States, to Seward, his chosen
Secretary of State, for criticism and suggestion. Mr. Seward approved
the argument, but advised the addition of a closing paragraph "to meet
and remove prejudice and passion in the South; and despondency in the
East." He submitted two paragraphs of his own as alternative models.
The second was in that poetic vein which occasionally cropped out in
Seward's speeches, and over which Lincoln on better acquaintance was
wont good-naturedly to rally him. It is evidence of Lincoln's
predilection for poetic language, at least at the close of a speech,
that he adopted the latter paragraph. It ran:
"I close. We are not, we must not be, aliens or enemies, but
fellow-countrymen and brethren. Although passion has strained our
bonds of affection too hardly, they must not, I am sure they will not,
be broken. The mystic chords which, proceeding from so many
battlefields and so many patriot graves, pass through all the hearts
and all hearths in this broad continent of ours, will yet again
harmonize in their ancient music when breathed upon by the guardian
angel of the nation."
Lincoln, by deft touches which reveal a literary taste beyond that of
any statesman of his time, indeed beyond that which he himself had yet
exhibited, transformed this passage into his peroration. His
emendations were largely in the way of excision of unnecessary
phrases, resolution of sentences broken in construction into several
shorter, more direct ones, and change of general and vague terms in
rhetorical figure to concrete and picturesque words. He wrote:
"I am loth to close. We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be
enemies. Though passion may have strained, it must not break our bonds
of affection. The mystic chords of memory, stretching from every
battle-field and patriot grave to every living heart and hearth-stone
all over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the Union when
again touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our
nature."
More than the persuasive argument and gentle yet determined spirit of
the address, it was the chaste beauty and tender feeling of these
closing words which convinced the people that Lincoln measured up to
the high mental and moral stature demanded of one who was to be their
leader through the most critical period that had arisen in the life of
the nation.
The second inaugural address, coming so shortly before the President's
death, formed unintentionally his farewell address. It has the spirit
and tone of prophecy. The Bible, in thought and expression, was its
inspiration. The first two of its three paragraphs ring like a chapter
from Isaiah, chief of the poet seers of old. The concluding paragraph
is an apostolic benediction such as Paul or John might have delivered.
"With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the
right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the
work we are in; to bind up the nation's wounds; to care for him who
shall have borne the battle, and for his widow and his orphan--to do
all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among
ourselves, and with all nations."
Abraham Lincoln was born on the 12th day of February, 1809, on the Big
South Fork of Nolin Creek, in what was then known as Hardin, but is
now known as La Rue County, Kentucky, about three miles from
Hodgensville.
The above illustration represents the cabin in which he was born, as
described by his former neighbors.
Out of that old hut came the mighty man of destiny, the matchless man
of the Nineteenth Century. The world has no parallel for that
transition from the cabin to the White House.
age she wrote plays and poems. In 1843 Miss Ward married Dr. Samuel
Gridley Howe. In 1861, while on a visit to the camp near Washington,
with Governor John A. Andrew and other friends, Mrs. Howe wrote to the
air of "John Brown's Body" the "Battle Hymn of the Republic" which has
become so popular. She also published several books of poems. She
espoused the Woman-Suffrage movement in 1869, and devoted much of her
time to the cause. She died in 1910.
This poem was written by Mrs. Howe in her ninetieth year and read by
her in Symphony Hall, Boston, on the centenary of the martyred
President's birthday, February 12, 1909.
Through the dim pageant of the years
A wondrous tracery appears:
A cabin of the western wild
Shelters in sleep a new born child.
Nor nurse nor parent dear can know
The way those infant feet must go,
And yet a nation's help and hope
Are sealed within that horoscope.
Beyond is toil for daily bread,
And thought to noble issues led.
And courage, arming for the morn
For whose behest this man was born.
A man of homely, rustic ways,
Yet he achieves the forum's praise
And soon earth's highest meed has won,
The seat and sway of Washington.
No throne of honors and delights,
Distrustful days and sleepless nights,
To struggle, suffer and aspire,
Like Israel, led by cloud and fire.
A treacherous shot, a sob of rest,
A martyr's palm upon his breast,
A welcome from the glorious seat
Where blameless souls of heroes meet.
And thrilling, through unmeasured days,
A song of gratitude and praise,
A cry that all the earth shall heed,
To God, who gave him for our need.
Some men are born, while others seem to grow
From out the soil, like towering trees that spread
Their strong, broad limbs in shelter overhead
When tempest storms, protecting all below.
Lincoln, Great Oak of a Nation's life,
Rose from the soil, with all its virgin power
Emplanted in him for the fateful hour,
When he might save a Nation in its strife.
--_Bennett Chapple._
"Lying down was Lincoln's favorite attitude while reading or
studying. This remained a habit with him throughout
Noah Davis, born in Haverhill, New Hampshire, September 10, 1818. He
was educated at Albion, New York, and in the Seminary at Lima, studied
law, and was admitted to the bar in 1841. Appointed in March, 1857, a
justice of the New York Supreme Court. He served in Congress from
March 4, 1869, till July 20, 1870, when he resigned, having been
appointed by President Grant, U. S. Attorney for the Southern District
of New York. He resigned that office on Dec. 31, 1872, being elected
justice of the New York State Supreme Court. In 1874, he became
presiding justice. In January, 1887, he was retired from the bench and
resumed practice. He died in New York in 1902.
Almost a hundred years ago, in a lonely hut,
Of the dark and bloody ground of wild Kentucky,
A child was born to poverty and toil,
Save in the sweet prophecy of mother's love
None dreamed of future fame for him!
'Mid deep privation and in rugged toil,
He grew unschooled to vigorous youth,
His teaching was an ancient spelling book,
The Holy Writ, "The Pilgrim's Progress,"
Old "AEsop's Fables" and the "Life of Washington";
And out of these, stretched by the hearthstone flame
For lack of other light, he garnered lore
That filled his soul with faith in God.
The prophet's fire, the psalmist's music deep,
The pilgrims' zeal throughout his steadfast march,
The love of fellow man as taught by Christ,
And all the patriot faith and truth
Marked the Father of our Land!
And there, in all his after life, in thought
And speech and act, resonant concords were in his
great soul.
And, God's elect, he calmly rose to awful power,
Restored his mighty land to smiling peace,
Then, with the martyr blood of his own life,
Baptized the millions of the free.
Henceforth, the ages hold his name high writ
And deep on their eternal rolls.
Rev. George W. Crofts was born at Leroy, Illinois, April 9, 1842. He was
educated at the Illinois State University at Springfield, graduating in
the class of 1864. He was ordained to the ministry in 1865. He preached
at Sandwich, Illinois; Council Bluffs, Iowa; Beatrice, Nebraska, and
West Point. He died at West Point, May 16, 1909.
No choir celestial sang at Lincoln's birth,
No transient star illumined the midnight sky
In honor of some ancient prophecy,
No augury was given from heaven or earth.
He blossomed like a flower of wondrous worth,
A rare, sweet flower of heaven that ne'er should die,
Altho' the vase in which it grew should lie
Most rudely rent amid the darkling dearth.
There, in that humble cabin, separate
From everything the world regarded great,
Where wealth had never pressed its greedy feet,
Where honor, pomp or fame found no retreat;
E'en there was born beneath the eye of God
The noblest man His footstool ever trod.
_February 12, 1809_
Clarence E. Carr, born in Enfield, New Hampshire, January 31, 1853.
Received his early education from the common schools and academies of
the State, later from Dartmouth College, from which he graduated in
Practiced law, was also a manufacturer and farmer. Was president of
the New Hampshire Unitarian Conference, director and vice-president of
the American Unitarian Association, bank trustee, president of the
United Life and Accident Insurance Company of Concord, New Hampshire,
and occasionally a wanderer in the Elysian Fields of the Muses.
_The Three Birthday Anniversaries_ is the subject of a highly
appreciative article on the subject of Mendelssohn, Darwin and Lincoln,
by President Samuel A. Eliot of the American Unitarian Association, in
the _Christian Register_ of February 4, 1909. The central thought
therein is thus expressed very beautifully by Mr. Carr.
Three lives this day unto the world were given
Into whose souls God breathed the air of heaven,--
The first He taught the music of the spheres,
The next, of worlds, the story of the years;
And, loving, wise, and just beyond our dream,
The third a pilot made upon the New World's stream.
Their work is done, but ere they crossed "the portal,"
One, Song; One, Truth; One, Freedom; Made Immortal!
James Phinney Baxter, born at Gorham Maine, March 23, 1831. Academic
education; President of Savings Bank; Mayor of Portland, six terms,
President; built and donated to the City of Portland its public
library in 1888, and to Gorham in 1907; also conveyed to Gorham his
family mansion for use as a Museum. President Portland Public Library,
Baxter Library (Gorham), Portland Benevolent Society, Overseer of
Bowdoin College, President Maine Historical Society since 1890,
Northeast Historical Society since 1899. Author: _The Trelawney
Papers_, 1884; _The British Invasion From the North_, 1887; _Sir
Ferdinando Gorges and His Province of Maine_, 1890; _The Pioneers of
New France in New England_, 1894; edited ten volumes of _Documentary
History of Maine_, etc.
Son of the Western World! whose heritage
Was the vast prairie and the boundless sky;
Whose callow thoughts with wings untrammeled sought
Free scope for growth denied to Ease and Power,
Naught couldst thou know of place or precedent,
For Freedom's ichor with thy mother's milk
Coursing thy veins, would render thee immune
To Fashion's dictate, or prescriptive creed,
Leaving thy soul unhindered to expand
Like Samuel's in Jehovah's tutelage.
Hail to thy Natal day!
Like all great souls with vision unobscured
Thou wert by Pride unswayed, and so didst tread
The gray and sombre way by Duty marked;
Seeking the springs of Wisdom, unallured
By shallower sources which the witless tempt.
Afar o'er arid plains didst thou behold
An empty sky, and mountains desolate
Barring thy way to fairer scenes beyond;
But faith was thine, and patience measureless,
Making thee equal to thy destiny.
Hail to thy Natal day!
It summons to our vision all thy life,
Of strenuous toil; the cabin low and rude;
The meagre fare; the blazing logs whose glow
Illumed the pages of inspired bards,
Shakespeare and Bunyan; prophets, priests and seers;
The darkling forest where thy ringing axe
Chimed with the music of the waterfall;
The eager flood bearing thy rugged raft
Swift footed through an ever changing world
Unknown to thee save in remembered dreams.
Hail to thy Natal day!
We see thee in the mart where Selfishness
For Fame ephemeral strives, and sordid gain;
Thy ill-requited toil till thou hadst earned
The right to raise thy potent voice within
A nation's forum, facing all the world;
And then, achievement such as few have known,
A mighty people placing in thy hand
A sceptre swaying half a continent,
Making thee peer of kings and potentates;
Aye, greater than them all, whate'er their power.
Hail to thy Natal day!
But, lo! the martial camp; the bivouac;
The rude entrenchment;--the grim fortalice;
The tented field;--the flaming battle line,
And thy great soul amidst it all unmoved
By petty aims, leading with flawless faith
Thy people to a promised land of peace;
And, then, when thou hadst reached the goal of hope,
And the world stood amazed, the heavy crown
Of martyrdom was pressed upon thy brow
And thy immortal course was consummate.
Hail to thy Natal day!
In all great souls God sows with generous hand
The seed of martyrdom, for 'twas decreed
In Eden, that alone by sacrifice
Should sons of men the crown immortal win;
And thou, who didst the shining heights attain
Of unsurpassed achievement, didst but pay
The impartial toll of souls like thine required.
And we, who on the narrow marge of Time
Standing wondering, shed no tears, but raise to thee
The paeans to a martyred hero due,
Hail to thy Natal day.
Nancy Hanks Lincoln died October 5, 1818, aged thirty-five years. The
design of this monument is by Thompson Stickle, and it was constructed
by J. S. Culver of Springfield, Illinois, and dedicated October 2,
In the construction of the monument in Spencer County, Indiana, Mr.
Culver used as much of the granite as possible from the National
Lincoln Monument before it was reconstructed.
The face of this block is handsomely hand-carved. As the Scroll of
Time unrolls, it reveals the name of "Nancy Hanks Lincoln." The ivy
represents affection and the branch of oak nobility.
The public celebration of the centenary of Lincoln's birth was held in
the town of North Adams, Massachusetts, February 12, 1909.
Ex-Senator Thomas F. Cassidy, in his address, said: "One hundred years
ago today, in Hardin County, Kentucky, there was ushered into being
the child, Abraham Lincoln.
"As God selected Mary, the humble girl of Judea, to be the mother of
the Saviour of mankind and she gave birth to Him in the stable at
Bethlehem, so it was ordained that in the lowly log cabin of the
Kentucky wilderness, Nancy Hanks should receive into the protection of
her sheltering arms the child who was destined to be the Saviour of
the Republic."
Harriet Monroe, born at Chicago, Illinois, December, 23, 1860.
Graduated Visitation Academy, Georgetown, District Columbia, 1879. In
December, 1889, was appointed to write text for cantata for opening of
Chicago Auditorium in March, 1891. Was requested by Committee on
Ceremonies of Chicago Exposition to write a poem for the dedication;
her _Columbia Ode_ was read and sung at the dedicatory ceremonies on
the 400th anniversary of the discovery of America, October 21, 1892.
Author of _Valerie_, and other poems, 1892; _The Columbia Ode_, 1893;
_John Wellborn, Poet, A Memoir_, 1896; _The Passing Show--Modern Plays
in Verse_, 1903, etc.
Prairie Child,
Brief as dew,
What winds of wonder
Nourished you?
Rolling plain
Of billowy green,
Fair horizons,
Blue, serene.
Lofty skies
The slow clouds climb,
Where burning stars
Beat out the time.
These, and the dreams
Of fathers bold,
Baffled longings
Hopes untold.
Gave to you
A heart of fire,
Love like waters,
Brave desire.
Ah, when youth's rapture
Went out in pain,
And all seemed over,
Was all in vain?
O soul obscure,
Whose wings life bound,
And soft death folded
Under the ground.
Wilding lady,
Still and true,
Who gave us Lincoln
And never knew:
To you at last
Our praise, our tears,
Love and a song
Through the nation's years.
Mother of Lincoln,
Our tears, our praise;
A battle-flag
And the victor's bays!
_From an Horatian Ode by Richard Henry Stoddard_
A laboring man with horny hands,
Who swung the axe, who tilled the lands,
Who shrank from nothing new,
But did as poor men do.
One of the people. Born to be
Their curious epitome,
To share, yet rise above,
Their shifting hate and love.
Common his mind, it seemed so then,
His thoughts the thoughts of other men,
Plain were his words, and poor--
But now they will endure.
No hasty fool of stubborn will,
But prudent, cautious, still--
Who, since his work was good,
Would do it as he could.
No hero, this, of Roman mold--
Nor like our stately sires of old.
Perhaps he was not great--
But he preserved the state.
O, honest face, which all men knew,
O, tender heart, but known to few--
O, wonder of the age,
Cut off by tragic rage.
James Whitcomb Riley was born in Greenfield, Indiana, about 1852. He
was engaged in various pursuits until 1875, when he began to
contribute verses of poetry to local papers in the Western district
which gained wide popularity for him. His published works in dialect
and his serious poems have also proved very popular.
A peaceful life;--just toil and rest--
All his desire;--
To read the books he liked the best
Beside the cabin fire.
God's word and man's;--to peer sometimes
Above the page, in smoldering gleams,
And catch, like far heroic rhymes,
The onmarch of his dreams.
A peaceful life;--to hear the low
Of pastured herds,
Or woodman's axe that, blow on blow,
Fell sweet as rhythmic words.
And yet there stirred within his breast
A faithful pulse, that, like a roll
Of drums, made high above his rest
A tumult in his soul.
A peaceful life!--They hailed him even
As One was hailed
Whose open palms were nailed toward Heaven
When prayers nor aught availed.
And lo, he paid the selfsame price
To lull a nation's awful strife
And will us, through the sacrifice
Of self, his peaceful life.
William Wilberforce Newton, born in Alleghany, Pennsylvania, March,
law, and was admitted to the bar in 1867. He served as Captain and
Assistant Adjutant General of U. S. Volunteers in 1861-5; was Editor
of the _Philadelphia Press_ and President of the "Press" Publishing
Co., from 1867 till 1878. He is the author of _Vignettes of Travel_
and has been largely engaged in railway building in Mexico.
Saw you in his boyhood days
O'er Kentucky's prairies;
Bending to the settler's ways
Yon poor youth whom now we praise--
Romance like the fairies?
Hero! Hero! Sent from God!
Leader of his people.
Saw you in the days of youth
By the candle's flaring:
Lincoln searching for the truth,
Splitting rails to gain, forsooth,
Knowledge for the daring?
Hero! Hero! Sent from God!
Leader of his people.
Saw you in his manhood's prime
Like a star resplendent,
Him we praise with measured rhyme
Waiting for the coming time
With a faith transcendent?
Hero! Hero! Sent from God!
Leader of his people.
Saw you in the hour of strife
When fierce war was raging,
Him who gave the slaves a life
Full and rich with freedom rife,
All his powers engaging?
Hero! Hero! Sent from God!
Leader of his people.
Saw you when the war was done
(Such is Lincoln's story)
Him whose strength the strife had won
Sinking like the setting sun
Crowned with human glory?
Hero! Hero! Sent from God!
Leader of his people.
Saw you in our country's roll
Midst her saints and sages,
Lincoln's name upon the scroll--
Standing at the topmost goal
On the nation's pages?
Hero! Hero! Sent from God!
Leader of his people.
Hero! Yes! We know thy fame;
It will live forever!
Thou to us art still the same;
Great the glory of thy name,
Great thy strong endeavor!
Hero! Hero! Sent from God!
Leader of his people.
"The charm which invested the life on the Eighth Circuit in the mind
and fancy of Mr. Lincoln yet lingered there, even in the most
responsible and glorious days of his administration; over and over
again has the great President stolen an hour ... from his life of
anxious care to live over again those bygone exhilarating and halcyon
days ... with Sweet or me."--Henry C. Whitney in his _Life of Lincoln_.
Wilbur Hazelton Smith was born in the town of Mansfield, New York,
March 28, 1860. His early education was obtained from the district
school and he began teaching at the age of sixteen. After completing
an academic course he went to Cornell University from which he was
graduated with the degree of A.B. in 1885.
He at once became a teacher and after a few years started the first
Current Topic paper in the state, _The Educator_. Later he edited a
teachers' paper, _The World's Review_. Perhaps he is best known as
publisher of the _Regents' Review Books_ used in nearly every school
in the United States. His death occurred October 19, 1913.
Unlearned in the cant and quip of schools,
Uncouth, if only city ways refine;
Ungodly, if 'tis creeds that make divine;
In station poor, as judged by human rules,
And yet a giant towering o'er them all;
Clean, strong in mind, just, merciful, sublime;
The noblest product of the age and time,
Invoked of God in answer to men's call.
O simple world, and will you ever learn,
Schools can but guide, they cannot mind create?
'Neath roughest rock the choicest treasures wait;
In meanest forms we priceless gems discern;
Nor time, nor age, condition, rank nor birth,
Can hide the truly noble of the earth.
This chair was used by Mr. Lincoln in his law office at Springfield,
Illinois, where, before leaving for the City of Washington after his
election as President, he wrote his Inaugural Address and formed his
Cabinet, frequently conferring with his twenty-year law partner,
William H. Herndon, on such matters, and adopting changes as suggested
if he considered them advisable. It was presented to O. H. Oldroyd
while living in the Lincoln Homestead, Springfield, by Mr. Herndon,
March 18, 1886.
James Riley was born in the hamlet of Tang, one mile from the town of
Ballymahon, County Longford, Ireland, and two miles from Lissoy,
County Westmeath, the home of Oliver Goldsmith--on the road between
the two--August 15, 1848. Published _Poems_, 1888; _Songs of Two
Peoples_, 1898, and _Christy of Rathglin_, a novel, in 1907. His poem
_The American Flag_, has been rated often as the best poem written to
our banner. Four lines on the loss of the Titanic brought from Captain
Rostron words in which he said: "With such praise one feels on a
higher plane, and must keep so, to be worthy of continuance."
High-browed, rugged, and swarthy;
A picture of pain and care;
A lawyer sat with his greatest brief,
High in his office chair.
His Country was to him client!
Futurity his ward!
And he must plead 'fore Fate's high court,
With prayer, and pen, and sword.
Elected, by his people!
His heart and theirs, one beat!
He sees the storm-clouds gather;
The waves dash at his feet!
Gloom upon land and water!
The Flag no more in the sun!
Lights from the South-line flickering,
And--dying--one--by one!
November's winds wild shrieking!
Night--closed, on a Union rent!
And still the lawyer sat dreaming
Of its once bright firmament.
Then, '61! Dark! Silent!
Only the calling word
Of Anderson at Sumter
The lawyer, writing, heard.
Writing the Message that ever
Shall live in the hearts of men;
With cannon to cannon fronting,
The lawyer held the pen.
Only thinking of Country
And the work that must be done;
Nature made in roughest mold
Her favored, fated son.
He wrote while the world was waiting
Great Freedom's final test.
Should, or should not Democracy
Be planted in the West?
Should Liberty at last survive
And man look straight on man?
Law, in its round, its strength and might
Be timed unto sense and plan?
He, in his chair there sitting,
Had all these things for thought.
Now, the Vote unrecognized,
Must battles wild be fought?
Alone the Chair is standing,
To remind the Land of the time
When the Slaver's heart, all passion,
He planned, and pursued his crime!
As he rushed Disunion's order,
On, on from State to State!
And the Pen talked loud down the Message,
And bided the Land to wait.
Elizabeth Porter Gould, born June 8, 1848, died July 28, 1906.
Essayist, lecturer and author; an early inspirer of woman's clubs and
the pioneer of the _Current Events_ and _Topics_ classes in Boston and
vicinity; an officer in several educational societies and honorary
member of the Webster Historical Society, Castilian Club and other
clubs where she had read many historical papers of great research and
given many practical suggestions. Among her published works are _Gems
From Walt Whitman_, _Anne Gilchrist and Walt Whitman_, _Ezekial
Cheever, Schoolmaster_, _John Adams and Daniel Webster as
Schoolmasters_, _A Pioneer Doctor_, _One's Self I Sing_ and _The
Brownings and America_. She had great energy and force of character,
and a capacity for friendship which was a source of great happiness to
her and endeared her to all.
In life's great symphony,
Above the seeming discord and the pain,
A master-voice is ever singing, singing,
The plan of God to men.
In young America's song,
As threatening tumult pierced the tensioned air,
The voice of Lincoln over all was singing
The love of brother-man.
And still his voice is heard;
'Twill pierce the din of strife and mystery,
Till master-voices cease their singing, singing,
In life's great symphony.
His friends advised Lincoln to press his opponent on the Dred Scott
decision (of the United States Supreme Court permitting slavery in the
Territories), as Douglas would accept it, but argue for nullifying it
by anti-slavery legislation in the territorial assemblies, and this
would satisfy the people of Illinois, and elect him Senator. "All
right," said Lincoln, "then that kills him in 1860. I am gunning for
larger game."
Elizabeth Stuart Phelps was born in Andover, Massachusetts, on August
thirteen with contributions to the newspapers. The earlier years of
her life were devoted to Christian labors among the poor families in
Andover, but failing health finally prevented her from carrying on her
labors along that line, and kept her within her study, but her
sympathy was always enlisted in the reformatory questions of the day.
_The Gates Ajar_ proved very popular, as did also her many juvenile
books. She wrote this poem for the Lincoln Memorial Album in 1882. She
died January 29, 1911.
The angels of your thoughts are climbing still
The shining ladder of his fame,
And have not reached the top, nor ever will,
While this low life pronounces his high name.
But yonder, where they dream, or dare, or do,
The "good" or "great" beyond our reach,
To talk of him must make old language new
In heavenly, as it did in human, speech.
Mr. Lincoln was engaged in trying a case in the United States Court at
Chicago, Illinois, in April, 1860, and Leonard W. Volk, the sculptor,
called upon him and said: "I would like to have you sit to me for your
bust." "I will, Mr. Volk," replied Lincoln. This was the first time
that Lincoln sat to an artist for the reproduction of his physique in
this manner. Previous to this he had posed only for daguerreotypes or
for photographs.
Richard Watson Gilder was born in Bordentown, New Jersey, February 8,
Philadelphia Battery for the emergency call in the campaign of 1863,
when the Confederate forces invaded Pennsylvania. Later he was editor
of a number of magazines and upon the death of J. G. Holland he was
made associate editor of the _Century_. At the age of twenty-six he
had attained high literary standing. His poems are published in five
volumes. He rendered valuable service in tenement-house reform over
the country. He died on the 18th day of November, 1909.
This bronze doth keep the very form and mold
Of our great martyr's face. Yes, this is he:
That brow all wisdom, all benignity;
That human, humorous mouth; those cheeks that hold
Like some harsh landscape all the summer's gold;
That spirit fit for sorrow, as the sea
For storms to beat on; the lone agony
Those silent, patient lips too well foretold.
Yes, this is he who ruled a world of men
As might some prophet of the elder day--
Brooding above the tempest and the fray
With deep-eyed thought and more than mortal ken.
A power was his beyond the touch of art
Or armed strength--his pure and mighty heart.
The Saturday after the nomination of Mr. Lincoln for President of the
United States, the Committee appointed to inform him of the said
nomination arrived in Springfield and performed this duty in the
evening at his home.
The cast of his hand was made the next morning by Mr. Leonard W. Volk.
While the sculptor was making the cast of his left hand, Lincoln
called his attention to a scar on his thumb. "You have heard me called
the 'rail-splitter' haven't you?" he said, "Well, I used to split
rails when I was a young man, and one day, while sharpening a wedge on
a log, the axe glanced and nearly took off my thumb."
Edmund Clarence Stedman was born in Hartford, Connecticut, on the 8th
of October, 1833. He entered Yale College at the age of sixteen and
distinguished himself in Greek and English Composition. He was the
editor of several papers in Connecticut and in 1856 removed to New
York City--a larger field for his literary abilities. He was a
contributor to _Vanity Fair_, _Putnam's Monthly_, _Harper's Magazine_
and other periodicals. His poems: _The Diamond Wedding_, _How Old John
Brown Took Harper's Ferry_, _The Ballad of Lager-Bier_, gave him some
reputation. He was war-correspondent for the _World_ during the early
campaigns of the Army of the Potomac from the Headquarters of General
Irwin McDowell and General B. McClellan. He died in 1908.
Look on this cast, and know the hand
That bore a nation in its hold;
From this mute witness understand
What Lincoln was--how large of mold.
The man who sped the woodman's team,
And deepest sunk the plowman's share,
And pushed the laden raft astream,
Of fate before him unaware.
This was the hand that knew to swing
The axe--since thus would Freedom train
Her son--and made the forest ring,
And drove the wedge and toiled amain.
Firm hand that loftier office took,
A conscious leader's will obeyed,
And, when men sought his word and look,
With steadfast might the gathering swayed.
No courtier's, toying with a sword,
Nor minstrel's, laid across a lute;
Chiefs, uplifted to the Lord
When all the kings of earth are mute!
The hand of Anak, sinewed strong,
The fingers that on greatness clutch,
Yet lo! the marks their lines along
Of one who strove and suffered much.
For here in mottled cord and vein
I trace the varying chart of years,
I know the troubled heart, the strain,
The weight of Atlas--and the tears.
Again I see the patient brow
That palm erewhile was wont to press;
And now 'tis furrowed deep, and now
Made smooth with hope and tenderness.
For something of a formless grace
This molded outline plays about;
A pitying flame, beyond our trace,
Breathes like a spirit, in and out--
The love that casts an aureole
Round one who, longer to endure,
Called mirth to cease his ceaseless dole,
Yet kept his nobler purpose sure.
Lo, as I gaze, the statured man,
Built up from yon large hand, appears;
A type that nature wills to plan
But once in all a people's years.
What better than this voiceless cast
To tell of such a one as he,
Since through its living semblance passed
The thought that bade a race be free?
Painted by Hicks; lithograph by L. Grozelier; published by
The Republicans of Chicago had erected a huge temporary building for
the use of the Convention. The "Wigwam," as it was called, covered a
space of 600 feet by 180, and the height was between 50 and 60 feet.
The building would hold about 10,000 persons, and was divided into
platform, ground-floor and gallery. The stage upon which the delegates
and members of the press were seated, held about 1,800 persons; the
ground-floor and galleries, about 8,000. A large gallery was reserved
for ladies, which was filled every day to overflowing. The Convention
met on June 16, 1860.
Edmund Clarence Stedman is the author of this poem, and it was
published in the _Press and Tribune_ of Chicago, and in _Weekly
Illinois State Journal_, June 13, 1860. It was sung to the air of the
"Star Spangled Banner" throughout the campaign.
O Hark! from the pine-crested hills of old Maine,
Where the splendor first falls from the wings of the
morning,
And away in the West, over river and plain,
Rings out the grand anthem of Liberty's warning!
From green-rolling prairie it swells to the sea,
For the people have risen, victorious and free,
They have chosen their leaders, and bravest and best
Of them all is Old Abe, Honest Abe of the West!
The spirit that fought for the patriots of old
Has swept through the land and aroused us forever;
In the pure air of heaven a standard unfold
Fit to marshal us on to the sacred endeavor!
Proudly the banner of freemen we bear;
Noble the hopes that encircle it there!
And where battle is thickest we follow the crest
Of gallant Old Abe, Honest Abe of the West!
There's a triumph in urging a glorious cause,
Though the hosts of the foe for a while may be stronger,
Pushing on for just rules and holier laws,
Till their lessening columns oppose us no longer.
But ours the loud paean of men who have passed
Through the struggles of years, and are victors at last;
So forward the flag! Leave to Heaven the rest,
And trust in Old Abe, Honest Abe of the West!
William Henry Burleigh, born at Woodstock, Connecticut, February 2,
and an acceptable lecturer on behalf of temperance and the
anti-slavery cause. He removed to Pittsburgh in 1837, where he
published the _Christian Witness_, and afterwards the _Temperance
Banner_. As a writer, speaker, editor, poet, reformer, friend and
associate, it was the universal testimony of those who knew him best
and esteemed him most truly, that he stood in the forefront of his
generation. His poetry, animated by deep love of nature and a profound
desire to uphold truth and justice, gives him a place with our first
minor poets.
Up again for the conflict! Our banner fling out,
And rally around it with song and with shout!
Stout of heart, firm of hand, should the gallant boys be,
Who bear to the battle the Flag of the Free!
Like our fathers, when Liberty called to the strife,
They should pledge to her cause fortune, honor, and life!
And follow wherever she beckons them on,
Till Freedom results in a victory won!
They came from the hillside, they came from the glen--
From the streets thronged with traffic and surging with men,
From loom and from ledger, from workshop and farm,
The fearless of heart, and the mighty of arm.
As the mountain-born torrents exultingly leap
When their ice-fetters melt, to the breast of the deep;
As the winds of the prairie, the waves of the sea,
They are coming--are coming--the Sons of the Free!
Our Leader is one who, with conquerless will,
Has climbed from the base to the brow of the hill;
Undaunted in peril, unwavering in strife,
He has fought a good fight in the Battle of Life,
And we trust as one who--come woe or come weal,
Is as firm as the rock and as true as the steel.
Right loyal and brave, with no stain on his breast,
Then, hurrah, boys, for honest "Old Abe of the West!"
Madison Cawein was born at Louisville, Kentucky, on the 23rd of March,
and New Albany, Indiana. Graduated from the Male High School,
Louisville, in 1886, and the following year published his first
volume, called _Blooms of the Berry_. Since then he published some
thirty-odd volumes of prose and poetry, both in the United States and
England. He died in 1915.
_Read for the first time at the Lincoln centenary celebration,
Temple Adath Israel, Louisville, Ky._
Yea, this is he, whose name is synonym
Of all that's noble, though but lowly born;
Who took command upon a stormy morn
When few had hope. Although uncouth of limb,
Homely of face and gaunt, but never grim,
Beautiful he was with that which none may scorn--
With love of God and man and things forlorn,
And freedom mighty as the soul in him.
Large at the helm of state he leans and looms
With the grave, kindly look of those who die
Doing their duty. Stanch, unswervingly
Onward he steers beneath portentous glooms,
And overwhelming thunders of the sky,
Till, safe in port, he sees a people free.
Safe from the storm; the harbor-lights of Peace
Before his eyes; the burden of dark fears
Cast from him like a cloak; and in his ears
The heart-beat music of a great release;
Captain and pilot, back upon the seas,
Whose wrath he'd weathered, back he looks with tears,
Seeing no shadow of the Death that nears,
Stealthy and sure, with sudden agonies.
So let him stand, brother to every man,
Ready for toil or battle; he who held
A Nation's destinies within his hand;
Type of our greatness; first American,
By whom the hearts of all men are compelled,
And with whose name Freedom unites our land.
He needs no praise of us, who wrought so well,
Who has the Master's praise; who at his post
Stood to the last. Yet, now, from coast to coast,
Let memory of him peal like some great bell,
Of him as woodsman, workman, let it tell!
Of him as lawyer, statesman, without boast!
And for what qualities we love him most,
And recollections that no time can quell.
He needs no praise of us, yet let us praise,
Albeit his simple soul we may offend,
That liked not praise, being most diffident;
Still let us praise him, praise him in such ways
As his were, and in words that shall transcend
Marble, and outlast any monument.
Isaac Bassett Choate, born at South Otis Field, Maine, July 12, 1833.
Bachelor of Arts, Bowdoin College, 1862. Author of _Wild Birds and
Flowers_, 1895; _Wells of English_, 1892; _Obeyed the Camel Driver_,
By special invitation from the faculty of the Alumni Association of
said College he read the following poem at their annual banquet held
on the centenary of Lincoln's birth, 1909:
From out the ranks of common men he rose--
Himself of common elements, yet fine--
As in a wood of different species grows
Above all other trees the lordly pine,
Upon whose branches rest the winter snows,
Upon whose head warm beams of summer shine;
His was the heart to feel the people's woes
And his the hand to hold the builder's line;
Strong, patient, wise and great,
Born ruler of the State.
Among a mountain group one sovereign peak
Will tower aloft unto commanding height
As if more distant view abroad to seek--
First one to hail, last one to speed the light;
Those granite sides will snows of winter streak
E'en in the summer with their purest white;--
Silent, serene, that summit yet will speak
Of loftiest grandeur to the enraptured sight;
So Lincoln's greatness shone
Supreme, unmatched, alone.
Charlotte Becker was born and has always lived in Buffalo, New York.
She was educated in private schools and in Europe, and has written
poems for _Harper's Magazine_, _The Metropolitan_, _The American_,
_Life_, etc., besides a number of songs which have been set to music
by Amy Woodfords-Finden, C. B. Hawley, Whitney Coombs and others.
Gaunt, rough-hewn face, that bore the furrowed signs
Of days of conflict, nights of agony,
And still could soften to the gentler lines
Of one whose tenderness and truth went free
Beyond the pale of any small confines
To understand and help humanity.
Wise, steadfast mind, that grasped a people's need,
Counting nor pain nor sacrifice too great
To keep the noble purpose of his creed
Strong against all buffeting of Fate,
Though no least solace sprang of work or deed
For him, since triumph came at last--too late.
Brave, weary heart, that beat uncomforted
Beneath its heavy load of grief and care;
That tears of blood for every battle shed,
Yet called on mirth to help his comrades bear
The waiting hours of anguish, and that sped
With loyal haste each breath of balm to share.
Only his people's griefs were his; no part
Had he within their joy; nor his the toll
To know the love that made rebellion start,
Spurred hosts unnumbered to a higher goal;
That his great soul should cleanse a nation's heart,
His martyred heart awake a nation's soul.
The last home of the parents of Lincoln. Built by his father, Thomas,
in 1831, near Farmington, Coles Co., Ill. The father died here in 1851
and the step-mother, Sarah Bush Lincoln, in 1869. After Lincoln was
elected President in 1860, and before leaving for Washington to be
inaugurated, he visited his mother in this cabin for the last time. As
he was leaving her, she made a prediction of his tragic death. With
arms about his neck, with tears streaming down her cheeks, she
declared it was the last time she would ever see him alive, and it
proved to be so.
Lincoln once said, "I was told that I never would make a lawyer if I
did not understand what 'demonstrate' means. I left my situation in
Springfield, went to my father's house, and stayed there till I could
give any proposition in the six books of Euclid at sight. I there
found out what demonstrate means."
On Monday, February 11, 1861, Mr. Lincoln and family in company with a
party left Springfield, Illinois, for Washington, D. C. A light rain
mixed with snow was falling at the time which made the occasion a
somewhat gloomy one. Mr. Lincoln appeared on the rear platform of the
car where he bade farewell to his neighbors in the following address:
"My friends, no one not in my position can appreciate the sadness I
feel at this parting. To this people I owe all that I am. Here I have
lived more than a quarter of a century. Here my children were born,
and here one of them lies buried.
"I know not how soon I shall see you again. A duty devolves upon me
which is greater, perhaps, than that which has devolved upon any other
man since the days of Washington. He never would have succeeded except
for the aid of divine Providence, upon which he at all times relied.
"I feel that I cannot succeed without the same divine aid which
sustained him; and on the same Almighty Being I place my reliance for
support, and I hope you, my friends, will pray that I may receive the
divine assistance, without which I cannot succeed, but with which
success is certain. Again, I bid you an affectionate farewell."
Mr. Lincoln thought that there is a time to joke and pray; and if, as
his detractors affirm, he joked all the way to Washington, if he did
not pray also (as we believe he did, and fervently, too) he at least
desired the prayers of others, as the circumstances recorded in the
following poem will show. It is from the pen of a lady of
Philadelphia, Mrs. Anna Bache.
"My friends,--elected by your choice,
From the long-cherished home I go,
Endeared by Heaven-permitted joys,
Sacred by Heaven-permitted woe,
I go, to take the helm of State,
While loud the waves of faction roar,
And by His aid, supremely great,
Upon whose will all tempests wait,
I hope to steer the bark to shore.
Not since the days when Washington
To battle led our patriots on,
Have clouds so dark above us met,
Have dangers dire so close beset.
And _he_ had never saved the land
By deeds in human wisdom planned,
But that with Christian faith he sought
Guidance and blessing, where he ought.
Like him, I seek for aid divine,
His faith, his hope, his trust, are mine.
Pray for me, friends, that God may make
My judgment clear, my duty plain;
For if the Lord no wardship take,
The watchmen mount the towers in vain."
He ceased; and many a manly breast
Panted with strong emotion's swell,
And many a lip the sob suppressed,
And tears from manly eyelids fell.
And hats came off, and heads were bowed,
As Lincoln slowly moved away;
And then, heart-spoken, from the crowd,
In accents earnest, clear, and loud,
Came one brief sentence, "We _will_ pray!"
On the 22nd of February, 1861, Washington's birthday, on his journey
to Washington, to assume the Presidency, Mr. Lincoln raised a new flag
over Independence Hall, then went inside and spoke as follows:--
"I am filled with deep emotion at finding myself standing in this
place, where were collected together the wisdom, the patriotism, the
devotion to principle from which sprang the institutions under which
we live. You have kindly suggested to me that in my hands is the task
of restoring peace to our distracted country. I can say in return,
sirs, that all the political sentiments I entertain have been drawn,
so far as I have been able to draw them, from the sentiments which
originated in and were given to the world from this hall. I have never
had a feeling, politically, that did not spring from the sentiments
embodied in the Declaration of Independence. I have often pondered
over the dangers which were incurred by the men who assembled here and
framed and adopted that Declaration. I have pondered over the toils
that were endured by the officers and soldiers of the army who
achieved that independence. I have often inquired of myself what great
principle or idea it was that kept this Confederacy so long together.
It was not the mere matter of separation of the colonies from the
motherland, but that sentiment in the Declaration of Independence
which gave liberty, not alone to the people of this country, but hope
to all the world, for all future time. It was that which gave promise
that in due time the weight would be lifted from the shoulders of all
men and that all should have an equal chance. This is the sentiment
embodied in the Declaration of Independence.
"Now, my friends, can this country be saved on that basis? If it can,
I will consider myself one of the happiest men in the world if I can
help to save it. But if this country cannot be saved without giving up
that principle, I was about to say I would rather be assassinated on
this spot than surrender it."
Four years and two months later, April 22, 1865, his body lay,
assassinated, on the very spot where he had made the above remarks,
then being taken to Springfield, Illinois, for burial.
Henry Wilson Clendenin, born at Schellsburg, Pennsylvania, August 1,
of Monmouth, Illinois, October 23, 1877; to them were born five
children, four of whom survive: George M., manager _Illinois State
Register_; Clarence R., Deputy Internal Revenue Collector,
Springfield, Illinois; Harry F., proofreader, _Illinois State
Register_, and Marie, Assistant Instructor Physical Education, State
Normal University, Normal, Illinois. He was a private of Company I,
Twentieth Pennsylvania Volunteer Infantry, in the Civil War. Began
newspaper work on _Burlington_ (Iowa) _Hawkeye_. Afterwards telegraph
editor _Peoria Transcript_, 1858; telegraph editor _Burlington
Gazette_, 1863, and editor and proprietor, _Keokuk Daily
Constitution_, 1876-1881; since that year was editor and president of
the _Illinois State Register_. Postmaster, Springfield 1886-90. Member
Illinois State Historical Society, The Jefferson Association, Grand
Army of the Republic and Sons of the American Revolution. Director of
Lincoln Library at Springfield, Illinois, for ten years. Member of the
First Congregational Church of that city.
This sonnet was written by Mr. Clendenin, in Philadelphia, February
Hall.
Hark to the sound that speedeth o'er the land!
Behold the sword in fratricidal hand!
'Tis duty calls thee, Lincoln, and thy trust
Demands that all thy acts be wise and just.
No idle task to thee has been assigned,
But work that's worthy of a giant mind--
And on the issue hangs the nation's fame
As a free people who deserve the name.
So, walk thou in the way the fathers trod;
Be true to freedom, country, and to God;
Then truth will triumph, treason be undone,
And thou be hailed the second Washington.
The first, the Father of his country--thou,
Its Saviour. Bind the laurel on thy brow.
An act of Congress July 9, 1790, established the District of Columbia
as the National Capital, and provided that prior to the first Monday
of December, 1800, the Commissioners should have finished a suitable
building for the sessions of Congress. The site of the Capitol was
included in L'Enfant's plan for the city. The cornerstone was laid
September 18, 1793, with Masonic rites, George Washington officiating.
The wings of the central building were completed in 1811, and were
partially burned by the British, in 1814. The entire central building
was finished in 1827. The cornerstone of the extension was laid by
President Fillmore, July 4, 1851. The extensions were first occupied
by Congress 1857 and 1859. Up to that time the Senate Chamber was the
present Supreme Court Room, and the Hall of Representatives was the
present National Statuary Hall. The dome was finished during the
administration of President Lincoln. The total cost of the Capitol
building and grounds was about thirty million dollars. The remains of
President Lincoln were escorted from the White House to the Capitol at
three o'clock P.M., on the 19th of April, 1865. The number in the
procession was estimated at forty thousand, and that many more were
spectators along the route. The burial service was conducted by Dr.
Gurley. The special train bearing the remains left at 8 A.M., Friday,
April 21, for Springfield, Illinois, stopping at Baltimore, Maryland;
Harrisburg and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Albany and Buffalo, New
York; Cleveland and Columbus, Ohio; Indianapolis, Indiana; Chicago,
Illinois, reaching Springfield, Illinois, the 3d of May, and was
buried the following day. The body lay in state in all of the above
cities.
The Second Inauguration of Abraham Lincoln as President of the
Edwin Markham, born at Oregon City, Oregon, April 23, 1852; settled in
California in 1857, and worked there during his boyhood, principally
as a blacksmith. Worked his way through the San Jose Normal School and
Santa Rosa College. Became a writer of stories and verse for papers
and magazines, and principal and superintendent of California schools.
Was the author of _The Man With the Hoe, and Other Poems_ (1899); _The
Man With the Hoe, with Notes by the Author_ (1900); _The End of the
Century_ (1899); _Lincoln, the Great Commoner_ (1900); _The Mighty
Hundred Years; Lincoln and Other Poems_ (1901); _The Shoes of
Happiness_ (1915). His _Man With the Hoe_ was extensively republished
and gave him wide fame.
When the Norn-Mother saw the Whirlwind Hour,
Greatening and darkening as it hurried on,
She bent the strenuous Heavens and came down
To make a man to meet the mortal need.
She took the tried clay of the common road--
Clay warm yet with the genial heat of Earth,
Dashed through it all a strain of prophecy;
Then mixed a laughter with the serious stuff.
It was a stuff to wear for centuries,
A man that matched the mountains, and compelled
The stars to look our way and honor us.
The color of the ground was in him, the red earth;
The tang and odor of the primal things--
The rectitude and patience of the rocks;
The gladness of the wind that shakes the corn;
The courage of the bird that dares the sea;
The justice of the rain that loves all leaves;
The pity of snow that hides all scars;
The loving-kindness of the wayside well;
The tolerance and equity of light
That gives as freely to the shrinking weed
As to the great oak flaring to the wind--
To the grave's low hill as to the Matterhorn
That shoulders out the sky.
And so he came.
From prairie cabin up to Capitol,
One fair ideal led our chieftain on.
Forevermore he burned to do his deed
With the fine stroke and gesture of a king.
He built the rail pile as he built the State,
Pouring his splendid strength through every blow,
The conscience of him testing every stroke,
To make his deed the measure of a man.
So came the Captain with the mighty heart;
And when the step of earthquake shook the house,
Wresting the rafters from their ancient hold,
He held the ridge-pole up and spiked again
The rafters of the Home. He held his place--
Held the long purpose like a growing tree--
Held on through blame and faltered not at praise,
And when he fell, in whirlwind, he went down
As when a kingly cedar, green with boughs,
Goes down with a great shout upon the hills,
And leaves a lonesome place against the sky.
The corner-stone was laid by George Washington on the 13th of October,
year 1800, also by every succeeding President. British troops burned
it in 1814, in President Madison's term. It was the first public
building erected in Washington. It is constructed of Virginia
freestone, and is 170 feet in length, 80 feet in depth, and consists
of a rustic basement, two stories and an attic.
John Vance Cheney, born Groveland, New York, December 29, 1848.
Graduated Temple Hill Academy, Genesee, New York, at seventeen.
Assistant principal there two years later. Practiced law, New York,
Newberry Library, Chicago, 1894-1909; author, _The Old Doctor_, 1881;
and a number of poems, 1887-1911.
The hour was on us; where the man?
The fateful sands unfaltering ran,
And up the way of tears
He came into the years.
Our pastoral captain. Forth he came,
As one that answers to his name;
Nor dreamed how high his charge,
His work how fair and large,
To set the stones back in the wall
Lest the divided house should fall,
And peace from men depart,
Hope and the childlike heart.
We looked on him; "'Tis he," we said,
"Come crownless and unheralded,
The shepherd who will keep
The flocks, will fold the sheep."
Unknightly, yes: yet 'twas the mien
Presaging the immortal scene,
Some battles of His wars
Who sealeth up the stars.
Not he would take the past between
His hands, wipe valor's tablets clean,
Commanding greatness wait
Till he stands at the gate;
Not he would cramp to one small head
The awful laurels of the dead,
Time's mighty vintage cup,
And drink all honor up.
No flutter of the banners bold
Borne by the lusty sons of old,
The haughty conquerors
Set forward to their wars;
Not his their blare, their pageantries,
Their goal, their glory, was not his;
Humbly he came to keep
The flocks, to fold the sheep.
The need comes not without the man;
The prescient hours unceasing ran,
And up the way of tears
He came into the years.
Our pastoral captain, skilled to crook
The spear into the pruning hook,
The simple, kindly man,
Lincoln, American.
President Lincoln and family attended this church during his
Administration. The pew that they occupied is still preserved in its
black walnut trimmings, though the rest of the sanctuary has been
refurnished.
Lyman Whitney Allen, born at St. Louis, November 19, 1854. Bachelor of
Arts, Washington University, St. Louis, 1878; later Master of Arts,
Princeton Theological, 1878-80; Post-graduate studies at Princeton
University; (D.D., University of Wooster, 1897). Ordained Presbyterian
Minister, 1882; stated supply Kimmswick, Missouri, 1881-3; DeSoto,
Missouri, 1883-5; Pastor-elect Carondelet Church, St. Louis, Missouri,
Director Board of Home Missions, Presbyterian; Chaplain New Jersey
Society D. A. R.; Member Society American Authors; New Jersey Society
S. A. R. Club, Princeton (New York). Has written many poems and
articles, including the New York _Herald's_ $1,000 prize poem which
was published in 1895.
Rev. Dr. Lyman Whitney Allen of Newark, New Jersey, had for his guest
Chief Justice Wendell Phillips Stafford of the Supreme Court of the
District of Columbia. Judge Stafford addressed the Men's Club of Dr.
Allen's church one evening, and next day, in company with his host,
visited the Lincoln statue on the court-house plaza. On the train that
bore him back to Washington that day, Judge Stafford wrote the poem on
the Statue. (See page 236).
A few weeks thereafter Dr. Allen visited his friend, the judge, in
Washington, and they made a little pilgrimage to the New York Avenue
Presbyterian church. In the Lincoln pew Dr. Allen sat and meditated,
and on his way back he wrote the verses.
"I had seen the Lincoln statue many times," says Dr. Allen, "but,
somehow, I could not get started on the poem I knew could be written
around it." And Judge Stafford wrote to his friend in Newark: "I had
seen the Lincoln pew a score of times without poetic result, yet you
come on a one-day visit and carry away the inspiration needed."
Within the historic church both eye and soul
Perceived it. 'Twas the pew where Lincoln sat--
The only Lincoln God hath given to men--
Olden among the modern seats of prayer,
Dark like the 'sixties, place and past akin.
All else has changed, but this remains the same,
A sanctuary in a sanctuary.
Where Lincoln prayed! What passion had his soul--
Mixt faith and anguish melting into prayer
Upon the burning altar of God's fane,
A nation's altar even as his own.
Where Lincoln prayed! Such worshipers as he
Make thin ranks down the ages. Wouldst thou know
His spirit suppliant? Then must thou feel
War's fiery baptism, taste hate's bitter cup,
Spend similar sweat of blood vicarious,
And sound the cry, "If it be possible!"
From stricken heart in new Gethsemane.
Who saw him there are gone, as he is gone;
The pew remains, with what God gave him there,
And all the world through him. So let it be--
One of the people's shrines.
From a photograph in possession of Mr. Stuart Brown of
John James Piatt was born in Indiana, March 1, 1835. His earliest
schooling was received at Rising Sun, in Indiana. At the age of
fourteen he was set to learn the printing business in the office of
the _Ohio State Journal_ at Columbus, Ohio, for a brief period, and at
the age of eighteen years first began to write verses. His poems were
chiefly on themes connected with his native West.
Stern be the Pilot in the dreadful hour
When a great nation, like a ship at sea
With the wroth breakers whitening at her lee,
Feels her last shudder if her helmsman cower;
A godlike manhood be his mighty dower!
Such and so gifted, Lincoln, may'st thou be
With thy high wisdom's low simplicity
And awful tenderness of voted power.
From our hot records then thy name shall stand
On Time's calm ledger out of passionate days--
With the pure debt of gratitude begun,
And only paid in never-ending praise--
One of the many of a mighty land,
Made by God's providence the Anointed One.
accepted the present of an Oxford Bible twenty
years ago.
Washington, D. C. October 3, 1861
Lincoln once said: "When any church will inscribe over its altar, as
its sole qualification for membership, the Saviour's condensed
statement of the substance of both law and gospel, 'Thou shalt love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul and with all
thy mind, and thy neighbor as thyself', that church will I join with
all my heart and all my soul."
_From Macmillan's Magazine, England_
Lincoln! When men would name a man
Just, unperturbed, magnanimous,
Tried in the lowest seat of all,
Tried in the chief seat of the house--
Lincoln! When men would name a man
Who wrought the great work of his age,
Who fought, and fought the noblest fight,
And marshalled it from stage to stage.
Victorious, out of dusk and dark,
And into dawn and on till day,
Most humble when the paeans rang,
Least rigid when the enemy lay
Prostrated for his feet to tread--
This name of Lincoln will they name,
A name revered, a name of scorn,
Of scorn to sundry, not to fame.
Lincoln; the man who freed the slave;
Lincoln, whom never self enticed;
Slain Lincoln, worthy found to die
A soldier of the captain Christ.
Photographed by Brady at the time of the "Cooper Institute Speech,"
Rev. Hamilton Schuyler was born in Oswego, New York, 1862, and is a
son of the late Anthony Schuyler, who was for many years rector of
Grace Church, Orange, New Jersey. He belongs to the well-known family
of that name, being seventh in descent from Philip Peterse Schuyler,
founder of the family, who came to this country from Holland and
settled in Albany in 1650. He studied at Oxford University, England,
and the General Theological Seminary of New York. Has held positions
in Calvary Church, New York; Trinity Church, Newport, Rhode Island,
and was for several years dean of the Cathedral at Davenport, Iowa,
under the late Bishop Perry. He began his rectorship at Trenton in
February, 1900. Has written extensively for journals and periodicals.
Among the bound publications which bear his name as author are _A
Fisher of Men_, a biography of the late Churchill Satterlee, priest
and missionary, son of the first Bishop of Washington; _Studies in
English Church History_; _The Intellectual Crisis Confronting
Christianity_; and _A History of Trinity Church, Trenton_. In 1900 his
poem, _The Incapable_, won a prize of two hundred dollars offered by
the late Collis P. Huntington through the _New York Sun_, for the best
poems antithetical to Edwin Markham's _Man With the Hoe_. A volume of
Mr. Schuyler's verses, under the title _Within the Cloister's Shadow_,
was published in 1914.
_From Lincoln Centenary Ode_
Tall, ungainly, gaunt of limb,
Rudely Nature molded him.
Awkward form and homely face,
Owing naught to outward grace;
Yet, behind the rugged mien
Were a mind and soul serene,
And in deep-set eyes there shone
Genius that was all his own.
Humor quaint with pathos blent
To his speech attraction lent;
Telling phrase and homely quip
Falling lightly from his lip.
Eloquent of tongue, and clear,
Logical, devoid of fear,
Making plain whate'er was dense
By the light of common sense.
Tender as the bravest be,
Pitiful in high degree,
Wrathful only where offence
Led to grievous consequence;
Hating sham and empty show;
Chivalrous to beaten foe;
Ever patient in his ways;
Cheerful in the darkest days;
Not a demi-god or saint
Such as fancy loves to paint,
But a truly human man
Built on the heroic plan.
Moses Kimball, a citizen of Boston, presented to the city a duplicate
of the Freedman's Memorial Statue erected in Lincoln Park, Washington,
D. C., after a design by Thomas Ball. The group, which stands in Park
Square, represents the figure of a slave from whose limbs the broken
fetters have fallen, kneeling in gratitude at the feet of Lincoln. The
verses which follow were written for the unveiling of the statue,
December 9, 1879.
John Greenleaf Whittier, born December 17, 1807, in Haverhill,
Massachusetts. He lived on a farm until he reached the age of
eighteen, working a little at shoemaking and also writing poetry for
the _Haverhill Gazette_. Later he became editor of a number of papers,
and his poems in after life were full of patriotism and the love of
human freedom, all of which attained a strong hold on the hearts of
the people. He would have prevented war, if possible, with honor, but
when war came he wrote in support of the Union cause, displaying no
bitterness, and when the conflict was over he was most liberal and
conciliatory. He was one of the most popular of poets. He died
September 7, 1892.
Amidst thy sacred effigies
Of old renown give place,
O city. Freedom-loved! to his
Whose hand unchained a race.
Take the worn frame, that rested not
Save in a martyr's grave;
The care-lined face, that none forgot,
Bent to the kneeling slave.
Let man be free! The mighty word
He spoke was not his own;
An impulse from the Highest stirred
These chiseled lips alone.
The cloudy sign, the fiery guide,
Along his pathway ran,
And Nature, through his voice, denied
The ownership of man.
We rest in peace where these sad eyes
Saw peril, strife, and pain;
His was the Nation's sacrifice,
And ours the priceless gain.
O symbol of God's will on earth
As it is done above
Bear witness to the cost and worth
Of justice and of love!
Stand in thy place and testify
To coming ages long,
That truth is stronger than a lie,
And righteousness than wrong.
Theron Brown, born at Willimantic, Connecticut, April 29, 1832.
Graduated at Hartford Theological Seminary in 1858; Newton Theological
Institution, 1859. Ordained in Baptist Ministry, 1859; Pastor South
Framingham, Massachusetts, 1859-62; Canton, Massachusetts, 1863-70; on
staff _Youth's Companion_ since 1870. Author various juvenile stories;
_Life Songs_ (poems), 1894; _Nameless Women of the Bible_, 1904; _The
Story of the Hymns and Tunes_, 1907; _Under the Mulberry Tree_ (a
novel), 1909; _The Birds of God_, 1911. He died February 14, 1914.
When, scornful of a nation's rest,
The angry horns of Discord blew
There came a giant from the West,
And found a giant's work to do.
He saw, in sorrow--and in wrath--
A mighty empire in its strait,
Torn like a planet in its path
To warring hemisphere of hate.
Between the thunder-clouds he stood;
He harked to Ruin's battle-drum,
And cried in patriot hardihood,
"Why do I wait? My hour has come!
"Was it my fate, my lot, my woe
To be the Ruler of the land,
Nor own my oath that long ago
I swore upon this heart and hand?
"That vow, like barb from bowman's string,
Shall pierce sedition's secret plea:
God grant the bloodless blow shall sting
Till brother's quarrels cease to be!
"Should once the sudden wound provoke
New strife in anger's zone
The clash may be the penal stroke
That makes a new Republic one."
He wrote his Message--clear as light,
And bolder than a king's command--
And when war's whirlwinds spent their might
There was no bondman in the land.
Photograph by Alexander Gardner, Washington, D. C.,
_January 1, 1863_
Lincoln, that with thy steadfast truth the sand
Of men and time and circumstance dost sway!
The slave-cloud dwindles on this golden day,
And over all the pestilent southern land,
Breathless, the dark expectant millions stand,
To watch the northern sun rise on its way,
Cleaving the stormy distance--every ray
Sword-bright, sword-sharp, in God's invisible hand.
Better with this great end, partial defeat,
And jibings of the ignorant worldly-wise,
Than laud and triumph won with shameful blows.
The dead Past lies in its dead winding-sheet;
The living Present droops with tearful eyes;
But far beyond the awaiting Future glows.
_Edmund Ollier, in London (Eng.) Morning Star._
Charles G. Foltz was born at West Winfield, Herkimer County, New York,
September 9, 1837. His parents were Benjamin Foltz, a Presbyterian
clergyman, and Jane Harwood Foltz. In 1846 the family moved to
Cuyahoga County, Ohio. In 1849 to Wisconsin, first to Rock County,
then to Walworth County, and in 1854 to Burlington, Racine County,
where he has since resided.
On freedom's summit, Oh, how grand
Stood Lincoln ruler of our land,
As he issued the sublime command
Let the enslaved be free.
Ere long he saw the Bondmen rise;
Ere long as Freedmen seize the prize,
The precious boon of liberty.
A backward glance he cast
Into the valley of the past,
Amid the shade and gloom
Discerning slavery's tomb.
Out from the depths his upturned eyes
Beheld the fleeing clouds the brighter skies.
Upon him shone a glory like the sun,
Reflecting "peace toward all, malice toward none."
As thus he filled his high exalted place,
The brave emancipator of a race,
He thought of the fierce struggle and the victory
And humbly deemed himself to be
Only the instrument of a Divine decree.
Rejoicing in the faith of brighter coming days
His "fervent prayers" were merged in those of praise.
Like unto psalmists of the olden time
His uttered thoughts inspired the nation's song,
Throughout the land the chorus rose sublime,
The exultant triumph of the right o'er wrong.
"Behold, what God the Lord hath wrought,"
More than we asked, or hoped, or thought.
Through the "Red sea" of blood and carnage
He brought our nation free of bondage.
With Moses sing, yea shout O North;
With Miriam answer back O South:
That "He hath triumphed gloriously."
.       .       .       .       .
Oh why the sudden blotting out of light?
The cloud of sorrow, dark as Plutonian night,
That cast its lengthening shadow o'er the land;
Changing to funeral dirge the choral grand.
Swift as the typhoon's breath--
The harbinger of death--
The cruel deed of hate
Swept the grand chief away.
Unto this day, and ever aye,
The nation mourns her martyr's fate.
Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this
continent a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the
proposition that all men are created equal.
Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation,
or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure. We are
met on a great battlefield of that war. We have come to dedicate a
portion of that field as a final resting place for those who here gave
their lives that that nation might live. It is altogether fitting and
proper that we should do this.
But, in a larger sense, we cannot dedicate--we cannot consecrate--we
cannot hallow--this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who
struggled here, have consecrated it, far above our poor power to add
or detract. The world will little note, nor long remember what we say
here, but it can never forget what they did here. It is for us the
living, rather, to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they
who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us
to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us,--that from
these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which
they gave their last full measure of devotion--that we here highly
resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain--that this nation,
under God, shall have a new birth of freedom--and that government of
the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the
earth.
November 19, 1863.                             ABRAHAM LINCOLN.
"Undoubtedly there were many in the audience who fully appreciated the
beauty of the President's address, and many of those who read it on
the following day perceived its wondrous character; but it is apparent
that its full force and grandeur were not generally recognized then,
either by its auditors or its readers. Not until the war had ended and
the great leader had fallen did the nation realize that this speech
had given to Gettysburg another claim to immortality and to American
eloquence its highest glory."--From the monograph on the Gettysburg
Address, by Maj. William H. Lambert.
Bayard Taylor, born in Kennett Square, Chester County, Pennsylvania,
on the 11th of January, 1825. Died in Berlin, Germany, on the 19th of
December, 1878. His boyhood was passed on a farm near Kennett. He
learned to read at four, began to write at an early age, and from his
twelfth year wrote poems, novels and historical essays, but mostly
poems. In 1837 the family moved to Westchester, and there and at
Unionville he had five years of high-school training. His first poem
printed was contributed to the _Saturday Evening Post_, in 1841, and
those to the _New York Tribune_ from abroad, written in 1844, were
widely read and shortly after his return were collected and published
in _Views Afoot, or Europe Seen With Knapsack and Staff_. With a
friend he bought a printing office in 1846, and began to publish the
_Phoenixville Pioneer_, but it was as a poet that he excelled above
most other vocations.
After the eyes that looked, the lips that spake
Here, from the shadows of impending death,
Those words of solemn breath,
What voice may fitly break
The silence, doubly hallowed, left by him?
We can but bow the head, with eyes grown dim,
And, as a Nation's litany, repeat
The phrase his martyrdom hath made complete,
Noble as then, but now more sadly sweet:
"Let us, the Living, rather dedicate
Ourselves to the unfinished work, which they
Thus far advanced so nobly on its way,
And saved the periled State!
Let us, upon this field where they, the brave,
Their last full measure of devotion gave,
Highly resolve they have not died in vain!--
That, under God, the Nation's later birth
Of freedom, and the people's gain
Of their own Sovereignty, shall never wane
And perish from the circle of the earth!"
From such a perfect text, shall Song aspire
To light her faded fire,
And into wandering music turn
Its virtue, simple, sorrowful, and stern?
His voice all elegies anticipated;
For, whatsoe'er the strain,
We hear that one refrain:
"We consecrate ourselves to them, the Consecrated!"
Benjamin Franklin Taylor, born at Lowville, New York, July 19, 1819.
He was for several years connected with the _Chicago Evening Journal_.
He wrote _Pictures of Life in Camp and Field_ (1871); _The World on
Wheels_, etc. (1874); _Songs of Yesterday_ (1877); _Between the Gates_
(1878); _Summer Savory_, etc. (1879); _Dulce Domum_ (1884);
_Theophilus Trent_, a novel (1887); etc. Among his best known poems
are: _Isle of the Long Ago_, _Rhymes of the River_, and _The Old
Village Choir_.
The following is an excerpt from a _Centennial Poem_ read by
B. F. Taylor on Decoration Day (May 30, 1876), on the
occasion of the centennial celebration by the Department of
the Potomac, Grand Army of the Republic, at Arlington
Cemetery, Washington, D. C.
They see the pilgrims to the Springfield tomb--
Be proud today, oh, portico of gloom!--
Where lies the man in solitary state
Who never caused a tear but when he died
And set the flags around the world half-mast--
The gentle Tribune and so grandly great
That e'en the utter avarice of Death
That claims the world, and will not be denied,
Could only rob him of his mortal breath.
How strange the splendor, though the man be past!
His noblest inspiration was his last.
The statues of the Capitol are there.
As when he stood upon the marble stair
And said those words so tender, true and just,
A royal psalm that took mankind on trust--
Those words that will endure and he in them,
While May wears flowers upon her broidered hem,
And all that marble snows and drifts to dust:
"Fondly do we hope, fervently we pray
That this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away:
With charity for all, with malice toward none,
With firmness in the right
As God shall give us light,
Let us finish the work already begun,
Care for the battle sons, the Nation's wounds to bind,
Care for the helpless ones that they will leave behind,
Cherish it we will, achieve it if we can,
A just and lasting peace, forever unto man!"
Amid old Europe's rude and thundering years,
When people strove as battle-clouds are driven,
One calm white angel of a day appears
In every year a gift direct from Heaven,
Wherein, from setting sun to setting sun
No thought of deed of bitterness was done.
"Day of the Truce of God!" Be this day ours,
Until perpetual peace flows like a river
And hopes as fragrant as these tribute flowers
Fill all the land forever and forever!
Hermann Hagedorn, born in New York, July 18, 1882. Instructor in
English at Harvard in 1909-1911. Wrote several one-act plays which