material from the Google Print project.)
The Princeton University Library
_C. S. Robinson & Co. University Press_
_Princeton N. J._
The present edition of the poetical works of Philip Freneau was begun at
the advice of the late lamented Moses Coit Tyler. In his opinion there
were few fields in American history that needed exploring more, and few
that would require on the part of the explorer more of the Columbus
spirit.
It would be almost impossible for a poet to pass more completely into
the shadow than has Freneau during the century since his activities
closed. His poems are, almost all of them in their earliest editions,
exceedingly rare and costly and only to be read by those who can have
access to the largest libraries, his letters and papers have almost
entirely disappeared, and his biography in almost every book of
reference has been so distorted by misstatement and omission as to be
really grotesque.
This neglect has resulted not from lack of real worth in the man, but
from prejudices born during one of the most bitter and stormy eras of
partisan politics that America has ever known. What Sidney Smith said of
Scotland at this period was true here: "The principles of the French
Revolution were fully afloat and it is impossible to conceive a more
violent and agitated state of society." Freneau was a victim of this
intense era. New England rejected him with scorn and all admirers of
Washington echoed his epithet, "that rascal Freneau." Thus it has become
the tradition to belittle his work, to vilify his character, and to sum
up his whole career, as a prominent New Englander has recently done, by
alluding to him as a "creature of the opposition."
Unprejudiced criticism, however, has always exalted Freneau's work. The
great Scotch dictator Jeffrey, with all his scorn for American
literature, could say that "the time would arrive when his poetry, like
that of Hudibras, would command a commentator like Gray;" and Sir Walter
is of the kind in the language." E. A. Duyckinck did not hesitate to
group him as one of "four of the most original writers whom the country
has produced," and S. G. W. Benjamin could say in 1887: "In all the
history of American letters, or of the United States press, there is no
figure more interesting or remarkable, no career more versatile and
varied than that of Philip Freneau." Such testimony might be multiplied.
Surely had the poet been an ordinary man, Jefferson would never have
said "his paper has saved our Constitution," Madison would not have
pronounced him a man of genius, and Adams would hardly have admitted
that he was a leading element in his defeat.
I have endeavored not only to rescue the most significant of Freneau's
poems, but to arrange them as far as possible in their order of
composition, or at least in the order in which they first appeared in
print. It has seemed to me highly important to do this since such an
arrangement, especially with a poet like Freneau, who drew his themes
almost wholly from the range of his own observation, would be virtually
an autobiography, and since it would also furnish a running commentary
upon the history of a stirring period in our annals. The task has been
no slight one. It has necessitated a search through the files of a large
proportion of the early newspapers and periodicals and a minute
investigation of every other source of possible information.
Much material has been rescued that, as far as the public was concerned,
had practically become extinct. I have introduced the unique fragment of
an unpublished drama, "The Spy," which I was the first to explore. I
have taken pains to reproduce the poet's early poetical pamphlets
dealing with the first year of the Revolution, not one of which has ever
been republished. The revisions of many of these used by Freneau in his
later collections were so thoroughgoing as to be in reality entirely new
poems. "The Voyage to Boston," for instance, published during the siege
of Boston, was cut down for the 1786 edition from six hundred and five
lines to three hundred and six lines, and of these more than half were
entirely changed. From the standpoint of the historian, at least, the
original version is much more valuable than that made several years
after the war was over. This is true of all the earlier pamphlet poems.
Aside from their value as specimens of Freneau's earlier muse they are
valuable commentaries on the history of the stormy times that called
them forth, and I have not hesitated to reprint them verbatim in
connection with the revised versions. The pamphlet poems "American
Liberty" and "General Gage's Confession," (until recently supposed to
have been lost) exist only in unique copies. Freneau never attempted to
revise them. Some of the other early poems, notably "The House of
Night," I have annotated with care, showing the evolution of the poem
from its first nucleus to its final fragmentary form. In the case of a
few of the more important poems, especially those dealing with the
Revolution, I have given variorum readings.
Aside from this early material, which has a real historical value, I
have introduced very few poems not included in Freneau's collected
editions of 1786, 1788, 1795, 1809 and 1815. Previous to 1795 the poet
contributed to the press. In his later years he was more prodigal of his
found elsewhere, and these few only on the best evidence that they were
genuine, for it has been my experience that when a poem is not to be
found in the collected editions of the poet it is almost certain that it
is not genuine. In justice to Freneau, who had the welfare of his
writings much at heart, and who cut and pruned and remodeled with
tireless hand, I have usually given the latest version.
I wish to acknowledge here my great indebtedness to the descendants of
Philip Freneau, especially Miss Adele M. Sweeney, Mr. Weymer J. Mills,
Mrs. Helen K. Vreeland, and Mrs. Eleanor F. Noel, who have allowed me to
consult freely all the papers and literary remains of the poet and have
supplied me with all possible information. I would also express my great
obligation to many librarians, collectors, and scholars, who have
cheerfully aided me, especially to Mr. Wilberforce Eames, of the New
York Public Library, the late Paul Leicester Ford, Mr. Robert H. Kelby,
of the New York Historical Society, Mr. John W. Jordan, of the
Pennsylvania Historical Society, Mr. A. S. Salley, Jr., of Charleston,
S. C., Mr. E. M. Barton, of the American Antiquarian Society, and Dr. E.
C. Richardson, of Princeton University, who with their courteous
helpfulness have made possible the work. I wish also to express my
thanks to Professor A. Howry Espenshade, and Mr. John Rogers Williams,
to whose careful and patient work upon the proofs the accuracy of the
text depends.
STATE COLLEGE, Pa., Sept. 19, 1902.
PREFACE                                                            v
LIFE OF PHILIP FRENEAU                                          xiii
_Early Poems. 1768-1775_
_The First Poetic Period. 1775-1781_
In the possession of the Freneau descendants there is an old French
Bible, printed in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1587, which preserves an
unbroken roll of the heads of the family back to the original owner of
the book, Philip Fresneau, who on his death-bed in La Chapelle, France,
in 1590, gave it into the hands of his eldest son. For five generations
the book remained in the little suburban village, its possessors sturdy,
industrious tradesmen, who stood high in the esteem of their community
and yet who on account of their Protestant faith were often imposed upon
and at times even persecuted. It was doubtless this feeling of
insecurity, if not positive persecution, which compelled Andre Fresneau,
like so many of his fellow Huguenots, to leave his native village and to
seek a home in a more tolerant land.
He landed in New York in 1707. He was in his thirty-sixth year, an
active, handsome man, almost brilliant in certain directions, of
pleasing address, and skilled from his youth in the handling of affairs.
He became at once a leader in the little Huguenot Colony whose center
was the quaint old church "du St. Esprit" on Pine street. He was soon in
the midst of a thriving shipping business, dealing largely in imported
wines, and in 1710, three years after his arrival, he was able to
furnish a beautiful home on Pearl street, near Hanover Square, for his
young bride, Mary Morin, a daughter of Pierre Morin, of the French
Congregation. Of the comfort and hospitality of this home there are many
contemporary references. John Fontaine, the French traveller, was
entertained here in 1716 and he speaks highly of his host and his
In 1721 Mrs. Fresneau died at the early age of twenty-seven, leaving
behind a family of five children, the oldest only nine years of age.
Four years later the father followed. But the young family was far from
destitute. The business house in New York had grown to be very
profitable and there was a large landed estate in eastern New Jersey, a
part of which was sold in 1740. Soon the two eldest sons, Andrew, born
father's business. For years their firm name was familiar in New York.
Pierre Freneau (the family seem to have dropped the "s" about 1725) was
married in 1748 to Agnes Watson, daughter of Richard Watson, of
Freehold, whose property bordered upon the Freneau estate. They made
their home in Frankfort street, New York, and here on January 2 (O. S.),
our sketch. Four other children came from their union, of whom only one,
Peter, born April 5, 1757, who in later years became a prominent figure
in Charleston, S. C., need be mentioned.
The home of the Freneau's was one of comfort and even refinement. There
was a large and well selected library, the pride of its owner. "There,"
he would say to his visitors, pointing to his books, "use them freely,
for among them you will find your truest friends." He delighted in men
of refinement, and his home became a social center for the lovers of
books and of culture. He looked carefully after the education of his
children; and all of them early became omnivorous readers. In such an
environment the young poet passed his first ten years.
In 1762 the family decided to leave New York and to make their home
permanently on their estate, "Mount Pleasant," near Middletown Point, N.
J. The estate at this time contained nearly a thousand acres, and with
its large buildings, its slaves and its broad area under cultivation,
was in many respects like a southern plantation. Heretofore the elder
Freneau had made it of secondary importance. He had used it as a summer
resort, and as a pleasant relief to the monotony of his city business,
but now, perhaps on account of failing health, he determined to devote
to it all of his energies. Philip was left behind in New York. For the
next three years he lived at a boarding school in the city, going home
only during the long vacations. At the age of thirteen he was sent to
the Latin school at Penolopen, then presided over by the Rev. Alexander
Mitchell, to prepare for college.
The father of the family died Oct. 17, 1767. This, however, did not
disturb the plans of the eldest son, and on Nov. 7, 1768, he entered the
sophomore class at Princeton so well prepared that President Witherspoon
is said to have sent a letter of congratulation to his mother.
Of the college life of Philip Freneau we have only fragmentary records.
He was in his sixteenth year when he entered, a somewhat dreamy youth
who had read very widely, especially in the English poets and the Latin
classics, and who already commanded a facile pen, especially in the
field of heroic verse. During the year in which he entered Princeton he
composed two long poems, "The History of the Prophet Jonah," and "The
Village Merchant,"--surely notable work for the pen of a college
sophomore. During the following year he wrote "The Pyramids of Egypt,"
and before his graduation he had completed several other pieces, some of
them full of real poetic inspiration.
The period during which Freneau resided at Princeton was a most
significant one. In the same class with him were James Madison, H. H.
Brackenridge, the author of "Modern Chivalry" and a conspicuous figure
in later Pennsylvania history, and Samuel Spring, who was to become
widely influential in religious circles. In the class below him were the
refined and scholarly William Bradford and the brilliant Aaron Burr. The
shadow of the coming struggle with Great Britain was already lengthening
over the Colonies and nowhere was its presence more manifest than in the
colleges, always the most sensitive areas in times of tyranny and
oppression. On August 6, 1770, the senior class at Princeton voted
unanimously to appear at commencement dressed in American manufactures.
Another circumstance made the period a notable one. On June 24, 1769, a
little band of students, headed by Madison, Brackenridge, Bradford and
Freneau, organized an undergraduate fraternity to be called the
American Whig Society. One year later The Well Meaning Club, a rival
literary organization founded in 1765, became the Cliosophic Society.
The act was the signal for a war, the echoes of which have even yet not
the papers of William Bradford, in which are preserved the poetic
tirades, called forth in this first onset. Its title page is as follows:
"Satires | against the Tories. | Written in the last War between the
Whigs & Cliosophians | in which | the former obtained a compleat
Victory.
--Arm'd for virtue now we point the pen
Brand the bold front of shameless, guilty men
Dash the proud Tory in his gilded Car
Bare the mean heart that hides beneath a star."
It opens with ten "pastorals" by Brackenridge, of which the ninth begins
thus:
"Spring's Soliloquy that morning before he hung himself.
O World adieu! the doleful time draws nigh
I cannot live and yet I fear to die
Warford is dead! and in his turn Freneau
Will send me headlong to the shades below.
What raging fury or what baleful Star
Did find--ingulph me in the whiggish war
The deeds of darkness which my soul hath done
Are now apparent as the noon-day sun
A Thousand things as yet remain untold
My secret practice and my sins of old."
Then follow several satires by Freneau, full of fire and invective, but
like the work of all the others, not always refined or quotable in
print. His satire, "McSwiggen," printed in 1775, contains nearly half
of the poems,--the only lines indeed which are of any real merit. The
three concluding poems of the collection, and these by all means the
worst of the lot, are from no less a pen than Madison's. No patriotic
citizen will ever venture to resurrect them.
There is a tradition very widely current that Freneau was for a time the
room-mate of Madison. However this may be, there is no question as to
who was his most intimate friend. With Brackenridge he had much in
common. Both had dreams of a literary life, both had read largely in
polite literature, both scribbled constantly in prose and verse. In the
same manuscript volume with the Clio-Whig satires there is an extensive
fragment of a novel written alternately by Brackenridge and Freneau,
between September 20th and October 22d, 1770. Its manuscript title page
is as follows:
"Father Bombo's | Pilgrimage to Mecca in Arabia. | Vol. II. |
Wherein is given a true account of the innumerable and | surprizing
adventures which befell him in the course of that | long and
tedious Journey, | Till he once more returned safe to his native
Land, as related | by his own mouth. | Written By B. H. and
Mutato nomine
Fabula de te narratur--_Hor._
Change but the name
The story's told of you.
The adventures of the hero read like chapters from the "Arabian Nights."
He has been for seven days a close captive on a French man-of-war, but
he is rescued by an Irish privateer, only to be taken for a wizard and
thrown overboard in a cask which is finally washed ashore on the north
coast of Ireland. It would be useless to recount all of his adventures
both afloat and ashore. He finally succeeds in reaching Mecca, and in
returning safely home to America. The final chapter recounts the details
of his death and moralizes on his life and character.
The work is crude and hasty. Whole chapters of it were evidently written
at one sitting. The part signed H. B. is unquestionably the best; the
prose is vigorous and the movement rapid. The only merit in Freneau's
section lies in its lyric lament at the close of one of the chapters.
The hero suddenly bursts into minor song, the opening stanzas of which
are:
Sweet are the flow'rs that crown the Vale
And sweet the spicy breathing Gale
That murmurs o'er the hills:
See how the distant lowing throng
Thro' verdant pastures move along,
Or drink the Limpid Streams and crystal rills.
Ah see in yonder gloomy Grove
The Shepherd tells his tale of Love
And clasps the wanton fair:
While winds and trees and shades conspire
To fann with Love the Gentle Fire,
And banish every black and boding care.
But what has Love to do with me
Unknown ashore, distress'd by sea,
Now hast'ning to the Tomb:
Whilst here I rove, and pine and weep,
Sav'd from the fury of the deep
To find alas on shore a harder doom.
The nature of the undergraduate work done by Princeton in Freneau's time
was thus summed up by President Witherspoon in his "Address to the
Inhabitants of Jamaica," published in Philadelphia in 1772:
"In the first year they read Latin and Greek, with the Roman and Grecian
antiquities, and Rhetoric. In the second, continuing the study of the
languages, they learn a compleat system of Geography, with the use of
the globes, the first principles of Philosophy, and the elements of
mathematical knowledge. The third, though the languages are not wholly
omitted, is chiefly employed in Mathematics and Natural Philosophy. And
the senior year is employed in reading the higher classics, proceeding
in the Mathematics and Natural Philosophy and going through a course of
Moral Philosophy. In addition to these, the President gives lectures to
the juniors and seniors, which consequently every Student hears twice
over in his course, first, upon Chronology and History, and afterwards
upon Composition and Criticism. He has also taught the French language
last winter, and it will continue to be taught to all who desire to
"As we have never yet been obliged to omit or alter it for want of
scholars, there is a fixed Annual Commencement on the last Wednesday of
September, when, after a variety of public exercises, always attended by
a vast concourse of the politest company, from the different parts of
Of Freneau's proficiency as a student we have no record. Of the details
of the Commencement of September 25, 1771, when he received his degree,
we have but a brief account. Brackenridge opened the exercises with a
salutatory, and following came four other exercises which completed the
morning's programme.
The audience assembled again at three, and after singing by the students
there came:
"6. An English forensic dispute on this question, 'Does ancient poetry
excel the modern?' Mr. Freneau, the respondent, his arguments in favor
of the ancients were read. Mr. Williamson answered him and Mr. McKnight
replied."
"7. A poem on 'The Rising Glory of America,' by Mr. Brackenridge, was
received with great applause by the audience."
Madison on account of ill health did not appear.
The "Rising Glory" had been written conjointly by Brackenridge and
Freneau. Although the former was given on the Commencement programme
full credit for the exercise, it was surely Freneau who conceived the
work and who gave it its strength and high literary value. Brackenridge
in later years confessed to his son that "on his part it was a task of
labor, while the verse of his associate flowed spontaneously." The poem
was printed in Philadelphia the following year, and in 1786 Freneau
isolated his own portion for publication in the first edition of his
works.
This detaching of Freneau's portion from the complete work destroyed at
the outset the original unity of the piece. The changes and omissions
made necessary by the process of separating the part from the whole, the
deliberate readjustment of perspective to bring the poem up to the
historical conditions of the later date, and the careful editing which
strove to remove blemishes and weaknesses due to inexperience, combine
to make the 1786 version practically a new poem.
The first glimpse of Freneau after his graduation from Princeton is
furnished by a letter to Madison, dated Somerset County, in Maryland,
"If I am not wrongly informed by my memory, I have not seen you
since last April, you may recollect I was then undertaking a School
at Flatbush on Long Island. I did not enter upon the business it is
certain and continued in it thirteen days--but--'Long Island I have
bid adieu, With all its bruitish, brainless crew. The youth of
that detested place, Are void of reason and of grace. From Flushing
hills to Flatbush plains, Deep ignorance unrivalld reigns.' I'm
very poetical, but excuse it. 'Si fama non venit ad aures,'--if you
have not heard the rumour of this story (which, by the by is told
in various taverns and eating houses) you must allow me to be a
little prolix with it. Those who employed me were some gentlemen of
New York, some of them are bullies, some merchants, and others
Scoundrels: They sent me eight children, the eldest of whom was 10
years. Some could read, others spell and a few stammer over a
chapter of the Bible--these were my pupils and over these was I to
preside. My salary moreover was L40,--there is something else
relating to that I shall not at present mention--after I forsook
them they proscribed me for four days and swore that if I was
caught in New York they would either Trounce or Maim me: but I
luckily escaped with my goods to Princetown--where I remained till
commencement--so much for this affair.
"I have printed a poem in New York called the American Village,
containing about 450 Lines, also a few short pieces added; I would
send you one if I had a proper opportunity--the additional poems
are--A Poem to the Nymph I never saw--The miserable Life of a
Pedagogue--and Stanzas on an ancient Dutch house on Long Island--As
to the main poem it is damned by all good and judicious judges--my
name is in the title page, this is called vanity by some--but 'who
so fond as youthful bards of fame?'
"I arrived at this Somerset Academy the 18th of October, and intend
to remain here till next October. I am assistant to Mr.
Brakenridge. This is the last time I shall enter into such a
business; it worries me to death and by no means suits my 'giddy,
wandring brain.' I would go over for the gown this time two years,
but the old hag Necessity has got such a prodigious gripe of me
that I fear I shall never be able to accomplish it. I believe if I
cannot make this out I must turn quack, and indeed I am now reading
Physic at my leisure hours, that is, when I am neither sleeping,
hearing classes, or writing Poetry--for these three take up all my
time.
"It is now late at night, not an hour ago I finished a little poem
of about 400 lines, entitled a Journey to Maryland--being the Sum
of my adventures--it begins 'From that fam'd town where Hudson's
flood--unites with Stream perhaps as good; Muse has your bard begun
to roam--& I intend to write a terrible Satire upon certain vicious
persons of quality in New York--who have also used me ill--and
print it next fall it shall contain 5 or 600 lines. Sometimes I
write pastorals to shew my Wit.
'Deep to the woods I sing a Shepherd's care,
Deep to the woods, Cyllenus calls me there,
The last retreat of Love and Verse I go,
Verse made me mad at first and----will keep me so.'
"I should have been glad to have heard from you before now; while I
was in college I had but a short participation of your agreeable
friendship, and the few persons I converse with and yet fewer,
whose conversation I delight in, make me regret the Loss of it. I
have met with a variety of rebuffs this year, which I forbear to
mention, I look like an unmeaning Teague just turn'd out of the
hold of an irish Ship coming down hither I met with a rare
adventure at Annapolis. I was destitute even of a brass farthing. I
got clear very handsomely.
"Could one expect ever to see you again, if I travel through
Virginia I shall stop and talk with you a day or two. I should be
very glad to receive a letter from you if it can be conveniently
forwarded--in short 'Non sum qualis eram' as Partridge says in Tom
Jones--My hair is grown like a mop, and I have a huge tuft of beard
directly upon my chin--I want but five weeks of twenty-one years of
age and already feel stiff with age--We have about 30 Students in
this academy, who prey upon me like Leaches--'When shall I quit
this whimpering pack, and hide my head in Acomack?'--Shall I leave
them and go 'Where Pokomokes long stream meandering flows--
"Excuse this prodigious scrawl without stile or sense--I send this
by Mr. Luther Martin who will forward it to Col. Lee--and he to you
I hope. Mr. Martin lives in Acomack in Virginia this side the bay.
Farewell and be persuaded I remain your
truly humble Serv't and friend
The scene of Freneau's new labors was the famous old school near
Princess Anne, Md., which in 1779 was incorporated as Washington
Academy. Brackenridge became Master here shortly after his graduation,
and in the words of his son and biographer, received "a handsome
salary." "He continued here," says his biographer, "during several
years until the breaking out of the American Revolution, in the midst of
a wealthy and highly polished society, greatly respected as a man of
genius and scholarship. He used to speak with the pride of a Porson, of
the Winders, the Murrays, the Parnells and others who afterward became
best families of Northern Virginia, Maryland and Delaware.
The length of Freneau's stay in Maryland is uncertain. There is evidence
that he remained as Second Master of the school for several years. There
is a tradition in the family that it was the wish of Freneau's father
that he study divinity and that for a time he joined with Brackenridge
in preparing for this profession; and there is another, which is very
persistent, that he left Maryland to study the law in Philadelphia, but
I can find no positive evidence. The period between 1772 and 1775 is at
best a vague one in our life of the poet.
In the early summer of 1775, Freneau suddenly appeared in New York as a
publicist of remarkable fluency. Before November he had issued no less
than eight long poems as separate publications, nearly all of them
called forth by the new crisis in American affairs. Beginning with
"American Liberty," issued by Anderson, the editor of the new patriotic
weekly, _The Constitutional Gazette_, he published pamphlet after
pamphlet in rapid succession, all of them throwing upon Gage and the
British cause in Boston all the satire and invective which he had used
so mercilessly in the old society war at Princeton. Two of these were
published by Hugh Gaine, and another, "The Voyage to Boston," first
issued by Anderson, was reprinted at once in Philadelphia. All of them
have fared hardly during the years. Several, like "General Gage's
Soliloquy," and "Timothy Taurus," which recounts the story of a journey
made by Freneau to Passaic Falls, near Paterson, New Jersey, in August,
have disappeared entirely, one of them, the "General Gage's Confession,"
has never been republished in any form, and all the others were cut down
and altered by the author for later editions until they were almost in
every respect entirely new poems.
That these voluminous and vigorous tirades, which their author evidently
poured forth with perfect ease, were criticised and condemned by the
fastidious we have no evidence. Certain it is that judging by the
contemporary newspaper press they were exceedingly popular. Yet, in
November we find Freneau in a sad state of discouragement, ready to give
up forever all association with the muses. Some one, envious of his
rising fame, has criticised him unmercifully. He seeks out the old
Clio-Whig satires and after adapting and reshaping them he hurls them at
the head of his enemy whom he designates as McSwiggen.
Great Jove in wrath a spark of genius gave
And bade me drink the mad Pierian wave,
Hence came those rhymes with truth ascribed to me,
That urge your little soul to jealousy.
Devoted mad man what inspired your rage,
Who bade your foolish muse with us engage?
Against a windmill would you try your might,
Against a castle would a pigmy fight?
The young poet had begun to realize how barren was the new world in
poetic appreciation; how impossible it was for even a true poet to
practice his art where few could appreciate, and none really cared:
Alone I stand to meet the foul-mouthed train
Assisted by no poets of the plain.
He looked longingly across the water where poets were appreciated:
Long have I sat on this disastrous shore,
And sighing sought to gain a passage o'er
To Europe's towns, where as our travellers say
Poets may flourish, or perhaps they may.
The poem was a valedictory.
I to the sea with weary steps descend,
Quit the mean conquest, that such swine must yield
And leave McSwiggen to enjoy the field.
In distant isles some happier scene I'll choose
And court in softer shades the unwilling muse.
Freneau had determined to spend the winter in the West Indies. He had
become acquainted during the autumn with a West Indian gentleman by the
name of Hanson, who owned large estates in the islands, and who sailed
master of his own vessel. Upon his invitation Freneau became a passenger
late in November for the Island of Santa Cruz. Early in the voyage the
mate died, and the young poet, his education outweighing his
inexperience in nautical matters, was chosen to fill his place. The
study of navigation, made necessary by this step, doubtless turned the
direction of his whole life.
For the next two years Freneau made his home on Captain Hanson's estate
on the Island of Santa Cruz. A selection from one of his letters
charmingly describes the spot.
"The town at the west end is but mean and ordinary, consisting of a
fort and perhaps 80 or 90 wooden houses. The harbor is nothing but
an open road, where, however, ships lie in the utmost security at
their moorings, the bottom being good for anchorage and the wind
always off shore. About two miles to the eastward of this town,
along the seashore, is the estate of Capt. Hanson, into which the
sea has formed a beautiful little bay, called Buttler's Bay, about
though all the rest of the shore is sharp craggy rocks. My
agreeable residence at this place for above two years, off and on
during the wars in America, renders the idea of it all too
pleasing, and makes me feel much the same anxiety at a distance
from it as Adam did after he was banished from the bowers of
He seems to have been employed at intervals by Captain Hanson in voyages
about the islands. Thus he records of the Island of St. James, that "I
went over July 13, 1777, and remained there eight days. We loaded our
vessel with coral rock, which is used in these islands for burning lime
of a very excellent quality."
It was while at the ideal retreat at Butler's Bay that Freneau wrote
three of his most significant poems, "Santa Cruz," "The House of Night,"
and "The Jamaica Funeral," the first two of which were contributed to
the _United States Magazine_ in 1779. Of these the "House of Night" is
the most significant, containing as it does evidence of a high creative
power and a romantic imagination, rare indeed in English poetry in 1776.
There are evidences that Freneau composed the first draught of the poem
before leaving for the West Indies, but the point is not an important
one. For the edition of 1786 he nearly doubled the original version,
but in 1795 he cut it down to a few stanzas, taking from it nearly
everything which had made it a notable creation.
On April 1, 1778, Freneau sailed from Santa Cruz for the Bermuda
Islands, where for a time he was the guest of the English Governor. In
an elaborate letter to Brackenridge, dated Bermuda, May 10, afterward
published in the _United States Magazine_, he describes at length the
islands. "These," he says in conclusion, "are a few particulars
concerning this little country where I resided upwards of five weeks,
and if this slight description gives you any satisfaction, it will amply
repay me for the fatigues I underwent in sailing thither."
On June 6th he was again in Santa Cruz; on the 15th he set out on his
homeward voyage, after an absence of nearly three years. The run home
was destined to be eventful. Off the Delaware capes the vessel was taken
by the British, but Freneau, being a passenger, was landed on July 9th
and allowed to go his way.
The young poet now retired to Mount Pleasant, where doubtless he quietly
remained until the autumn of the following year. In August, 1778, he
published with Bell in Philadelphia the pamphlet poem "America
Independent." On January 1, 1779, Brackenridge issued in Philadelphia
became an important contributor. His work in prose and verse may be
found in nearly every number. There are prose papers on the West Indies,
purporting to be extracts from the letters of "a young philosopher and
_bel esprit_ just returned from several small voyages amongst these
islands." There are several early poems for the first time put into
print, like "Columbus to Ferdinand" and "The Dying Elm," and there are
several notable long poems, like "Santa Cruz" and "The House of Night."
At least three of the poetical contributions were written expressly for
the magazine: "George the Third's Soliloquy," "Psalm cxxxvii
Imitated,"--signed "Monmouth, Sept. 10,"--and the "Dialogue between
George and Fox." It is evident, however, that Freneau, though his work
very greatly strengthened the periodical, was only a "valued
contributor." The psalm in the September issue, the first of the poems
to bear his name, had a foot-note explaining that the author was "a
young gentleman to whom in the course of this work we are greatly
indebted."
The _United States Magazine_ is a notable landmark in American literary
history. Its methods, as we view them to-day, seem singularly modern,
and its materials and arrangement are indeed remarkable when we view
them against the background of their times. It was a spirited, intensely
patriotic, and highly literary periodical; the single fact that "The
House of Night" first appeared in its columns is enough to stamp it as
no ordinary work. It died with its twelfth issue, owing to the troubled
state of the country and the unsettled nature of the currency. Then,
too, the audience to which it appealed was found to be a small one. In
his valedictory the editor complains bitterly of the unliterary
atmosphere in America. A large class, he declares, "inhabit the region
of stupidity, and cannot bear to have the tranquility of their repose
disturbed by the villanous shock of a book. Reading is to them the worst
of all torments, and I remember very well that at the commencement of
the work it was their language, 'Art thou come to torment us before the
time?' We will now say to them, 'Sleep on and take your rest.'"
Late in September, 1779, Freneau shipped as super-cargo on the brig
_Rebecca_, Captain Chatham, bound for the Azores. After an exciting
voyage, during which they were several times chased by British ships,
they arrived at Santa Cruz, in the island of Teneriffe, where they