material from the Google Print project.)
Transcriber's Notes: Variations in spelling and hyphenation have been
left as in the original except in the Index where the spelling has been
changed to match the spelling in the body of the text. A complete list
of corrections follows the text. Other notes also follow the text.
Words in italics in the original are surrounded by _underscores_.
Ellipses match the original. A row of asterisks represents a thought
break.
Author of:
The Erotic Motive in Literature
Dante and Other Waning Classics
The Shifting of Literary Values
Publishers    New York
_Printed in the United States of America_
From time immemorial it has been assumed that poetry is something which
is caviare to the general public. A "poem" even to-day is supposed to be
a literary composition that is in artificial language arranged in a
metrical pattern, often conveying a trite idea or enshrining an
ineffective image. Thousands of volumes and essays have been written on
poetry, and instead of fathoming a true conception of its nature, they
have dealt with the trappings and garments which clothe it; these indeed
have often been confused with poetry itself. As a result, there has
grown around the pathway leading to poetry an endless maze of shrubbery.
The reader who has no knowledge of rules and laws relating to verse, who
is ignorant of technical requirements and established uses, labors under
the delusion that he does not like poetry. Though he reads many works in
prose that stir a deep emotional appeal within him, he does not regard
himself as one of those lovers who haunt the foot of Parnassus Hill.
I wish in this volume to present a conception of poetry freed from
academic and conventional standards. I wish to restore to the term
poetry its primary and fundamental significance as a verbal composition
in which the predominating feature is ecstasy. Poetry is an emotional
atmosphere that pervades all literature in its finest parts; it
characterizes any purely personal expression of the creative
imagination. As the reader perceives, my definition of poetry includes
prose literature in which ecstasy is present. I do not think of poetry
as a branch of literature couched in a metrical form, following regular
rules of rhythm, diction, figures of speech or rhyme. My conception of
poetry then, is not that of a department of literature which is opposed
to prose, but of an emotional spirit hovering over any kind of writing,
whether in verse or prose, which conveys ecstasy.
I shall try to show especially that the prose literature of ecstasy
fulfils all the intrinsic conditions which have been associated with
poetry. I shall consider the question of how much, or rather how little,
the element of rhythm or any other pattern is essential in determining
the nature of poetry. In fact, I shall even maintain that prose
exigencies of the emotion require, is the natural language of the
emotions, that it was so at the very beginnings of literary history, and
has in fact never ceased being used as such a vehicle. I shall further
take the position that the set forms of verse which have grown up among
all nations as a vesture for emotional writing, have been more or less
pervaded with artificiality. The final judgment as to the nature of
poetry resides in the appeal to the emotions. The test of poetry is not
in the form which the writer uses, or in compliance with rules of
prosody, but in the soul of the reader or hearer. If two emotional
passages, one in a set pattern and one in prose have the same effect
upon the responsive mechanism of the human soul, if they both arouse
ecstasy, it matters not if you refuse to call the prose passage poetry;
its effect is however that of poetry. It stirs and moves you to rapture,
it is a product of the author's unconscious, it speaks from soul to
soul, it is beautiful in its expressiveness, it has a rhythm of its own.
I shall not be concerned if you refuse to call this emotional prose
passage poetry, but it does belong to the literature of ecstasy, and
ecstasy was and is the first condition of poetic composition. The poetry
in verse is but part of the literature of ecstasy.
I shall hence deal in this volume largely with emotional or impassioned
prose; for it belongs to the literature of ecstasy, although it is often
termed poetic prose, or sometimes disparagingly, prose poetry. Under
this term I shall include not only the so-called "fine writing" but
emotional passages in the language of the average man, dialogues from
prose dramas, novels and short stories, and I shall also regard
criticism, essays and works on science and philosophy highly charged
with feeling as part of the province of the literature of ecstasy.
This work becomes thus a treatise on poetics, and will present a new
definition of poetry which will include all emotional prose writing.
A very important phase of the subject will take in the connection
between poetry or the literature of ecstasy, and various spheres of
human thought, such as ethical and social questions. The _idea_ will be
shown to be an important factor in the literature of ecstasy, for
ecstasy does not preclude the intellectual and moral activities. The
notion of art for art's sake thus assumes a rather trivial aspect. Any
idea whether scientific or philosophic, moral or social, if ecstatically
presented, becomes itself literature of ecstasy, or poetry.
Should the reader conclude to accept the prose literature of ecstasy as
poetry, he will find there was much poetry in the world's prose
literature that he has never recognized as such. He will also be
compelled to admit that much of what has been called poetry, because
written in verse, does not properly belong to poetry, as not being of
the literature of ecstasy. He will also see that the artificial
classifications of the different kinds of poetry, such as epic,
dramatic, pastoral, satirical, the ode, the sonnet, the ballad, the
didactic poem, the idyl, the elegy, etc., were based on fallacies and
were confusing and erroneous. There is only one species of poetry, the
utterance of the ecstatic state, and this is always personal, whether in
verse or prose, and hence, has a lyrical quality. If the poet gives the
utterances of other people in ecstatic states, these also are lyrics.
Hence every composition whether in verse or prose, that records ecstasy
here and there, is lyrical in those parts where the ecstasy is depicted.
The distinction between prose and verse will be more clearly defined, if
we refer to the poetry that is written in both these forms as poetry in
verse, and poetry in prose.
Sidney, Shelley, Wordsworth, Coleridge and Whitman, all of whom, besides
being great poets themselves, were probably the greatest critics of
poetry in the English language, took cognizance of the fact that the
great emotional prose writers of the world were poets. But most of the
critics have resented this attitude and have gone on in the unjust
classifications that recognize as a poet the petty rhymster, who is
often barren of both emotions and ideas. They also deny the glorious
epithet of poet to many great prose masters of the delineation of human
passions.
The question of free verse, naturally will come in for consideration. I
shall show that it is really rhythmical prose arranged so as to call
attention to the rhythms. I believe, however, that the free verse
writers have a right to make such linear arrangement. The bulk of the
poetry of the future may very likely be written in free verse forms, or
in prose. If much of the free verse of to-day fails in being poetry, it
is not because of the form, but because there is no ecstasy in it, or in
the poet's soul. Most of the poetry of the Bible is really in free
verse; it is poetry, however, not because of the free verse, but because
it presents universal phases of human ecstasy.
I have expressly ignored most of the great authors who wrote epics and
dramas in verse, and also most of the great English verse poets, for I
wish to arrive at a conception of poetry chiefly from prose examples.
Most critics have assumed that they could never learn what poetry was
unless they gave examples from men like Homer and Shakespeare, Sophocles
and Dante, Spenser and Milton. I rarely quote from them, not because I
do not recognize the greatest poetry in these authors, but because I
wish to show that one may arrive at a true conception of the nature of
poetry by illustrations from prose writers of ecstatic literature alone.
Although I feel that the artificial verse forms hamper instead of
beautify the expression of the poet's emotions, I do not think that such
forms ever will be, nor need be utterly abandoned. Man will always love
a ringing, rhyming ballad or song.
I have devoted a chapter to the poetry of the most poetical nation, the
Arabs; their poets produced the anomaly of utilizing the most artificial
metres, and yet never lost sight of the fact that ecstasy was the very
life of the poem. Probably no poets in the world have produced such
exquisite love poetry as the Arabs; they have also had great influence
on modern European poetry, for it is being recognized that modern
romantic fiction, especially in its employment of the tenderness of the
love sentiment as a frequent theme, was transplanted from them.
Poetry is the soul of literature, and we should cease limiting the term
to rhythmical or patterned productions, and apply it to emotional
writing in general. No term for the word poet in any language that I am
acquainted with includes in its etymological significance the idea of
rhythm or metrical pattern. The Hebrew word for poet is one who utters
prophecies or parables; the Greek word signifies a "maker"; the Latin
word "seer," the Arabian word "one who knows." Critics of the Bible have
especially recognized that the chief characteristic of both the true and
the false prophet (Nabi) was the ecstatic state; the Bible itself is of
course authority for this fact. The inferior prophet was one, however,
in whom the ecstatic state was hypnotically produced, in whom the
rational and moral faculties were suspended; the great prophets were
those in whom a powerful sense of social justice was illuminated by the
ecstatic state; hence the prophecies of the Bible are not orations
wherein rhetoric is a factor, but genuine literature of ecstasy, or
poetry in rhythmical prose, using parallelism.
I need not continue to give analyses of the Greek "poetes," the Latin
"vates," or the Arabian "shair," for it has been usually conceded that
these words all refer in their primary significance to the imaginative
work, or ecstatic state of the author, and not to the mere dabbler in
verse forms.
With theories of poetry being a product of the unconscious, as
developed by Freud and his disciples, or as being expression as advanced
by Croce, my task does not become so utterly devoid of reason as may
appear at first sight. One must not forget that the critics of poetry
have formed their conceptions of poetry by deducing rules from the verse
poems of the world's literature. Instead of looking ahead, they have
always looked back. Whenever a new great poet appeared, like Wordsworth,
Whitman or Ibsen for instance, they had to modify their theories, and to
revise their books on poetics and rhetoric. If the productions of Homer
and AEschylus had been entirely different, we no doubt would have had
other conceptions of poetry prevailing. Yet it is only by mere accident
that Homer dealt with gods, wars, mythical events and employed dactylic
hexameter. It is again also by pure chance that AEschylus used various
metres, made Prometheus and the Furies living beings, was sponsor for a
philosophy of divine punishment and often indulged in artificial
diction. Had these poets written novels instead, conveying just as much
genius and ecstasy as they did in their verse works, the critics of
poetry would have deduced an entirely different conception of it.
To Democritus belongs the honor of having first recognized among the
Greeks that ecstasy is the condition of the poet. To Plato goes the
distinction for having fully developed this theory. Aristotle accepted
also the view that poetry is ecstasy. The author of the ancient treatise
_On the Sublime_ perceived that the characteristic of poetic genius is
in the arousing of the ecstatic state. He says, in a passage which
deserves citation: "For it is not to persuasion (i. e., rhetoric) but to
ecstasy that passages of extraordinary genius carry the hearer."
But the ultimate significance of my volume is not concerned with the
prose form of poetry, but with poetry as a psychological process, as a
social force and as a philosophical expression.
Ecstasy, imagination, and the unconscious are all convertible and
synonymous terms for the primary source of poetry. They are the fruitage
of the turmoil of the soul, due to the apparently forgotten memories in
us of the emotional lives in all our ancestors. They represent also the
impassioned activities of our logical and rational faculties, the sum of
the views of life of the past. They emanate from the dream life of man,
whether this occurs in the waking or sleeping state. They are the
workings of the force we call inspiration.
My view of poetry as emotional prose literature enables me, I hope, to
eliminate many of the so-called conflicts between poetry and philosophy
and between poetry and morals. Philosophical and moral essays become
poetry in those parts lit up by ecstasy or emotion. If philosophy deals
with rare and profound truths in regard to the universe, if morals treat
of the noblest relations between man and man, then I know of no higher
form of poetry than a philosophical truth, or a moral or social
conception, when ecstatically stated; I can think of no higher
literature of ecstasy than the imaginative utterance of great
intellectual conceptions or impassioned expression of the love of
justice. Shakespeare's line, "We are but such stuff as dreams are made
of," is but a metaphysical theory emotionally put; Isaiah's rebuke to
the corrupt rich is but a didactic saw, ecstatically delivered. Poetry
finds its best material in metaphysical and ethical truths emotionally
presented. Lofty ideas, however, and not commonplace deductions or
conclusions are the best material for poetry.
I recognize, then, as great poetry, all writings in which metaphysical
or scientific truth and the spirit of social service are ecstatically
formulated in prose, though I make no terms with dry didactic works that
pretend to be poetry. I see the workings of the intellect in a product
of the imagination and I try to show that logic and morality have not
been so hostile to the poetic faculty as they have been usually deemed.
At the same time I find that all poetry is a product or expression of
the unconscious.
This is, then, not a book to teach the writing of poetry, but a study of
the poetic faculty in literature, not in rhetorical terms, but by an
appeal to the emotional life of the reader. It aims to point out the
best examples of the literature of ecstasy (or poetry) whether in verse
or prose. It shows that poetry is the very life of man's soul, that he
has always loved it, that he has in lieu of gratification of a good and
true poetic faculty often spent himself in cultivating substitutes for
it. What a superficial assumption that because people do not like verse
or read verse (especially trivial, lifeless, unhuman verse) they
therefore do not care for poetry! Furthermore, I try to relate the
poet's own literary revelation back to himself, just as the poet sought
to reveal his soul to the reader.
designate such prose where the rhythm is not marked. There is no sharp
dividing line between rhythmical and unrhythmical prose.
"The primal and danger-breeding gift of ecstasy," says Huneker in his
essay "Anarchs and Ecstasy" in _Bedouins_, "is bestowed upon few. Keats
had it, and Shelley; despite his passion, Byron missed it, as did the
Swinburne had it from the first. Not Tennyson and Browning, only in
occasional exaltation. Like the cold devils of Felicien Rops, coiled in
frozen ecstasy, the winds of hell booming about them, the poetry of
Charles Baudelaire is ecstatic. Poe and Heine knew ecstasy. . . .
William Blake and his figures, rushing down the secret pathway of the
mystic, which zigzags from the Fourth Dimension to the bottomless pit of
materialism, was a creator of the darker nuances of pain and ecstasy."
Ecstasy is derived from the Greek word which means _to make stand out_;
the mind makes sensible things stand out because it is concentrated on
particular emotions, and on the ideas associated with and springing from
these emotions. We must not make the mistake of thinking that ecstasy
has nothing to do with thought. On the contrary, it is too much occupied
with thought. It in fact represents a form of monomania connected with a
certain idea. It is a rapturous state in which the person is governed by
preoccupation with a definite viewpoint. The poetic condition of
ecstasy to which I refer is that mentioned by the poet Gray, in his
famous _Elegy_, when he speaks of one of the dead who might have "waked
to ecstasy the living lyre." He again uses the word in his _Progress of
Poesie_, when he speaks of Milton, who rode "upon the seraph wings of
ecstasy." Undoubtedly Gray understood by ecstasy the poetic emotion
primarily. In fact, any emotion that grips a man strongly may be called
ecstasy. Great grief or joy, pleasure or pain, passion or tragedy,
enthusiasm for an idea or a cause, are all ecstatic conditions. The
passion for social justice, an intense love for humanity, devotion to
art, beauty, knowledge, the emotions of a happy or an unhappy lover, all
constitute important subjects in the literature of ecstasy.
But the ecstasy must be a universal and secular ecstasy. There are two
kinds of ecstasies which though universal may manifest themselves in
such primitive forms as to appear only to limited circles. I refer to
the ecstasy of chauvinism, or fanatical, local, unjust patriotism, and
to the ecstasy of the pathologically religious victim whose views border
on hallucination. For example, if a man goes into extreme rhapsodies
about his particular race or country, and vituperates the people of
other races or countries, and justifies tyrannical measures towards
them; if, furthermore, he writes under the assumption that all the
intellectual and moral virtues reside in his people,--in short, if he is
purely clannish one can scarcely expect his literary product to appeal
to other people than his own. Again, if we hear or read the outburst of
a devotee of a particular religious sect, and we find that we can agree
with him in none of the views or dogmas he entertains; if, moreover, we
observe there is something also anti-human in the attitude that he takes
towards life, we are revolted by his passionate outpourings.
Though every nation and every religion is and should be to some extent
clannish and sectarian, still no literature that is purely so can have a
universal appeal. Hence, morbidly mystical poems, celebrating union with
an anthropomorphic God, poems chanting the praises of conquest and
imperialism, poems seething with hatred for people of other races or
religions, poems poisoned by hatred for humanity, are all examples of
the literature of ecstasy of a low order.
On the contrary, however, the literature of ecstasy may be both
religious and patriotic, and still appeal to the world at large. I
suppose the best illustration of such kind of literature is the psalms
in the Old Testament. They strike a universal note and move Christians,
Mohammedans, Jews, free thinkers alike. The ecstasy here does not depend
upon the author's attachment to a dogma, but springs most frequently
from a love of righteousness and humanity; hence the emotional appeal of
the poet touches even those who are not deists. There are also fine
touches and poignant prayers here and there that move even the
non-Christian in some of the works of St. Augustine, Thomas a Kempis,
Pascal and Bunyan.
We are not concerned here with the idea of ecstasy as a state that is
supposed to give us glimpses of the deity, nor with any attempt to
purify us by divesting our soul from the imperfect body and liberating
it from the frailties of the flesh. On the contrary, ecstasy is nothing
more than accumulated ordinary emotions and it speaks not only with the
body, but with all the memories of the body. It makes use in its
communications to us of those very physical infirmities that mystics
assume it shuns, those residing in the body as a medium. Ecstasy employs
the mind, and thus depends on the brain, the nerves, the physical
senses, which are unconsciously active even in a trance, and speak out
Generally speaking the ecstasy we mean in speaking of poetry is not the
same as that known to mysticism. However, the ecstasy in both springs
from the unconscious and is the fruit of an emotional soul because of
inherited memories of past emotions. In the ecstasy of the mystic, which
is usually what is called "religious experience," there is really little
application of the reason. It is even often pathological and is both the
product and the cause of a belief in absurd dogmas. It is often merely a
sublimated passion for morality, or the result, as Freudians have shown,
of a hysterical attachment to parents, or the idealization of a father.
It is often a sublimated sex love due to repression. Every one has been
struck with the sensuous images in the conceptions of the mystics.
Broadly speaking, mysticism seeks a condition of being united to a
personal God who is supposed to exist outside of nature; it craves to
partake of His holiness, and to cultivate purity and be rid of the
earthy. He who rejects belief in an anthropomorphic God or to the
mystics' particular religions can have little of the mystics' feelings.
He does not enter into sympathy with their ideas, and this militates
against the university of mystic poetry. The ecstasy does not "catch."
Most of the mystic poetry of the world, especially that centering around
asceticism and dogma, has importance only for the believer in the
mystic's philosophy. Very little of it has literary value, although it
often is presented in an emotional and effective manner.
But there is a form of ecstasy in a species of mysticism that is
universal and modern, and will appeal to all in spite of their religious
beliefs. When the poet recognizing God in nature seeks to identify
himself with nature by love and admiration for her, by a passion for a
life that is in accordance with her commands, his poetry embodying such
ecstasy is universal and is lifted into a high plane. It becomes a sort
of ecstatic statement of pantheistic philosophy that even the believer
may accept. That is why the Persian poet, Jalalu 'l-Din Rumi, for
example, appeals to us and why his works are of such high order.
Sufism or Persian mysticism began in asceticism and ended in pantheism.
It became a desire of a union with nature. In fact, it was an ecstatic
state of love for man, nature, God. It had its roots however in physical
love, and a story is told of a man who, wanting to become a Sufi, was
told first to love some woman. Some critics even declare that many of
the Persian love poems are really mystical poems, and though this is
only partly true, it is certain that the Persian mystical poems are
really love poems.
The mystic poems of the later Mohammedan Sufis are in fact
anti-Mohammedan, and yet by a curious paradox they become after much
controversy acceptable to the Church.
There is also much that is modern in the Pre-buddhistic _Vedas_ and
_Upanishads_, and in some Buddhistic works, because of the pantheistic
character of the ideas and the universality of the emotions.
The ecstasy of the pantheistic mystic is a secular feeling that we all
experience, and is the substance of literature in prose and verse. We
have much modern mystical poetry that has a universal appeal; it is also
pantheistic in character and shows the poet's desire for union not with
an anthropomorphic God, but with nature whom he recognizes as his God.
The best illustration of it is the famous passage in Wordsworth's lines
composed above Tintern Abbey, in which he tells us he hears in nature
"the still, sad music of humanity." The entire passage is great poetry,
not because of the blank verse but because of the mystical pantheistic
ecstasy.
Sane mystical poetry may then be of a very high order. You will find
examples of it in Blake, Emerson, Tennyson, and Matthew Arnold.
Shelley's _Hymn to Intellectual Beauty_, Browning's _Rabbi Ben Ezra_,
Whitman's _Chanting the Square Deific_ and Swinburne's _Hertha_ are
great mystical poems. These and others will be found in the _Oxford Book
of Mystical Verse_, collected by D. H. S. Nicholson and A. H. E. Lee.
Some years ago Arthur Machen produced a curious and illogical book,
_Hieroglyphics_, where he touched the borders of the truth of the
distinction between the literature of ecstasy and general literature,
but he introduced too many unbalanced views about literature being
unrelated to life. He was also thinking too exclusively of that
religious ecstasy that is found in the Catholic Church only. He also
took as his model for an example of ecstasy, _Pickwick Papers_, where
there is really little ecstasy, but he found none in _Vanity Fair_ where
there is much. He also, strange to relate, found no ecstasy in Meredith
or the later Hardy novels, and in no intellectual productions marked
with liberal thought except those of Rabelais. He showed no insight into
the real greatness of literature, because of his narrow conception of
ecstasy.
Ecstasy in the broad sense is any excited condition of the emotions.
Besides the meaning the word has in a narrow mystic and a medical sense,
with neither of which significances are we here concerned, it is
understood generally as referring to any condition where man is
overpowered by his feelings. It is this condition which makes the poet
write, and the reader is brought into a similar state with the poet by
reading the poems. Hence when the prose writer describes his ecstatic
state, or draws people into such a state, he is also a poet. The
critical or philosophical essay, the novel and short story when
ecstatical, are therefore poetry.
It is not necessary that a literary production should be a protracted
piece of ecstatical writing.
Many people are under the impression that when we speak of ecstasy we
mean a state where reason is utterly dethroned. Yet the Greeks, who make
inspiration the source of art, never let the passions so rule that utter
chaos resulted in the poet's creation. In Greek literature we have a
blending of reason and ecstasy. Professor Butcher has pointed out in his
excellent essay on "Art and Inspiration," in his _Harvard Lectures on
Greek Subjects_, the potency of reason in Greek poetry. The ideas of the
Greek writers were emotionalized, and there were ideas in their
emotional products. Demosthenes was like Plato, a passionate thinker;
Pindar, AEschylus and Sophocles were reasoning poets.
The Greeks used the word ecstasy in a modern secular sense rather than
in a spiritual or pathological one. It was the unconscious memory of the
poet coming to the fore and utilizing the intellect to pour light on the
soul. It was not the mystic's ecstasy where irrational conclusions were
arrived at because of some abnormality in the seer. The poet was always
a critic and a philosopher who tamed his wildest thoughts. "Moderns are
prone," says Butcher, "to believe that the action of poetic genius
abdicates its rights and descends to the lower level of talent when it
begins to reason. Greek literature decisively refutes such a notion. It
exhibits the critical faculty as a great underlying element in the
creative faculty."
Greek poetry then is the portrayal of reasoning passion, using at the
same time a conscious technique. It was the outpouring of the
personality of the poet made up of his intellect and passions. It
represented the breaking forth of the unconscious into expression,
controlled by a censorship on the part of the poet.
Plato's idea about poetry being a form of madness may, however, still be
accepted, when we understand by madness the being imbued with one's
emotions in a manner not depriving the poet of his intellectual powers.
Poetry is only the result of inspiration, if by this term we mean that
rationalized emotions have so accumulated as suddenly to seek
expression. Every poet, in prose or verse, writes from the unconscious
and he usually gets lost in his own characters or speaks directly in his
own person. The writer, however, is not mad, nor is his art allied to
madness. He is usually too sane, using his judgment at the same time
that his emotions are aroused. So we can still subscribe to Plato's idea
of unconscious art, put in the mouth of Socrates in the dialogue _Ion_:
All good poets, epic as well as lyric, compose their beautiful
poems not by art, but because they are inspired and possessed;
like the Corybantian revellers in their dances, who are not in
their right mind when they are composing their beautiful
strains, yet who, when falling under the power of music and
metre are inspired and possessed; like Bacchic maidens who
draw milk and honey from the rivers when they are under the
influence of Dionysus, but not when they are in possession of
their mind. And the soul of the lyric poets does the same, as
they themselves say; for they tell us that they bring songs
from the honeyed fountains, culling them out of the gardens
and dells of the Muses; they are like bees, winging their way
from flower to flower. And this is true. For the poet is a
light winged and holy thing, and there is no invention in him
until he has been inspired and is out of his senses, and the
mind is no longer in him: when he has not attained to this
state, he is powerless and is unable to utter his oracles.
The expressions referring to being out of the mind and senses
must not be taken literally.
As long as we bear in mind that Plato's idea of madness is merely the
concentration on one topic, his idea of poetry is true.
A remark of Socrates in the _Phaedrus_ should be well pondered by
disciples of art for art's sake. "He who having no touch of the Muses'
madness in his soul comes to the door and thinks that he will get into
the temple by the help of art--he, I say, and his poetry are not
admitted."
Plato himself was one of the finest of ancient poets, in spite of the
fact that he wanted to exclude poets from his ideal commonwealth. Some
of the finest prose poems and allegories of ancient literature are found
in his _Republic_, the _Phaedrus_ and _Symposium_. Most of these are
known to us, and need no mention. When Plato speaks of love, he does so
as a poet, and the passages on the subject in the last two named
dialogues are full of poetry.
I wish to give, besides the above passage, as an illustration of Plato's
own prose poetry, part of a speech by Alcibiades. It is at the
conclusion of the _Symposium_, and is part of Alcibiades's tribute to
Socrates and his speeches. Socrates, himself, thinks the speech is
delivered to create trouble between him and Agathon, of whom Alcibiades
is jealous. The speech is ruined also by a reference at length to a
phase of Greek life which is repulsive to us. After likening Socrates to
Silenus and to Marsyas, Alcibiades continues in the following prose
poem:
For my heart leaps within me fore than that of any Corybantian
reveller, and my eyes rain tears when I hear them. And I
observe that many others are affected in the same manner. I
have heard Pericles and other great orators, and I thought
that they spoke well, but I never had any similar feeling; my
soul was not stirred by them, nor was I angry at the thought
of my own slavish state. But this Marsyas has often brought me
to such a pass that I have felt as if I could hardly endure
the life which I am leading (this, Socrates, you will admit);
and I am conscious that if I did not shut my ears against him
and fly as from the voice of the siren my fate would be like
that of others--he would transfix me, and I should grow old
sitting at his feet. For he makes me confess that I ought not
to live as I do, neglecting the wants of my own soul, and
busying myself with the concerns of the Athenians; therefore I
hold my ears and tear myself away from him. And he is the only
person who ever made me ashamed, which you might think not to
be in my nature, and there is no one else who does the same.
For I know that I cannot answer him or say that I ought not to
do as he bids, but when I leave his presence the love of
popularity gets the better of me. And therefore I run away and
fly from him, and when I see him I am ashamed of what I have
confessed to him. Many a time have I wished that he were dead,
and yet I know that I should be more sorry than glad, if he
were to die; so that I am at my wit's end.
Symonds tells us that AEschylus was the great example of unconscious art
among Greek playwrights, and that he exemplifies Plato's theory of
poetry.
AEschylus's creation Cassandra is a good illustration of a character in
an ecstatic state. Cassandra is both prophetess and poetess, and her
cries move us to this day, when much of AEschylus's moral and religious
philosophy bores and irritates us. She is the incarnation of woman
suffering. She was ravished at Troy by Ajax and was given to Agamemnon
as prisoner of war, she the princess, daughter of Priam and Hecuba. She
had lost most of the members of her family and now anticipated great
trouble for Agamemnon whose wife Claetemnestrae was unfaithful to him.
She also foresaw her own death at the queen's hands, but it was her
punishment that her prophecies would not be heeded. She is partly mad,
but hers is the poetic frenzy, tempered by logic. Her most meaningless
ravings are full of meaning. They are poetry not because of the metre in
which they are rendered, but because of the rational ecstasy. This
ecstasy remains intact even in the English prose translation.
Nietzsche divided art into Apollonian and Dionysian. He found that the
Dionysian state depended on emotional or orgiastic intoxication. He
perceived that the ecstasy in this state was largely of a sexual
character. As he boldly put it, "The desire for art and beauty is an
indirect longing for the ecstasy of sexual desire, which gets
communicated to the brain." This is the thesis that Freud developed.
Croce, who has, however, something of the metaphysician and mystic in
him, is not in sympathy with this view, for he ridicules the idea that
the genesis of aesthetism lies in the desire of the male for the female.
Yet he agrees with Freud in the conception that art is a means of curing
oneself of sexual neurosis. "By elaborating his impressions," says
Croce, "man frees himself from them. By objectifying them, he removes
them from him and makes himself their superior. The liberating and
purifying function of art is another aspect and another formula of its
character and activity. Activity is the deliverer, just because it
drives away passivity."
Finely put, indeed, are the words of Nietzsche's views on ecstasy. "To
the existence of art, to the existence of any aesthetic activity or
perception whatsoever, a preliminary psychological condition is
indispensable, namely ecstasy. Ecstasy must first have intensified the
sensitiveness of the whole mechanism; until this takes place art is not
realized.
"All kinds of ecstasy, however differently conditioned, possess this
power; above all the ecstasy of sexual excitement, the oldest and most
primitive form of ecstasy."
Plato, it will be recalled, compared the state of the poet to that of
the reveller in the Bacchanalian rites. The favorable side of the
worship of Dionysius or the Bacchic revels has been shown by Euripides
in his play the _Bacchae_. He shows how King Pentheus was torn to pieces
in mistake by his own mother for his hostility to the bacchic rites.
Bacchus himself is the hero of the play. As the chorus says, Bacchus is
innately modest and modest women will not be corrupted at the revels.
Who is not moved by the song of the Chorus? "Would that I could go to
Cyprus, the island of Venus, where the lovers dwell, soothing the minds
of mortals, and to Paphos, which the waters of a foreign river flowing
with an hundred mouths fertilize without rain--and to the land of
Pieria, where is the beautiful seat of the Muses, the holy hill of
Olympus. Lead me thither, O Bromius, Bromius, O master thou of
Bacchanals. There are the Graces and there is Love and there is it
lawful for the Bacchae to celebrate their orgies."
The ecstasy of the revellers at the rites was poetic ecstasy, for it was
an unconscious or conscious erotic nature manifesting itself in the form
of a religious rite. Bacchus, aside from being god of wine, was the
symbol of productiveness and was accompanied by Priapus, and the phallus
was carried about. He was youthful and his symbols were animals like the
goat, ass, bull, tiger, lion, all of which had erotic significance. The
ecstatic rites with which he was worshipped were introduced from Thrace.
Aristotle attributes the origin of tragedy to the use of the dithyramb
of the revellers, and comedy to the phallic songs sung by them. The
point is that love frenzy leads to poetry, and we have an illustration
of it in the connection between the Bacchic rites and poetry, between
love and art. The rites degenerated under the Romans and were soon
suppressed by law.
Nietzsche gives us a profound interpretation of Euripides's play in the
twelfth section of _The Birth of Tragedy_. It is the old story of the
battle between the emotions and reason, the instinct and the intellect,
problems which men as different as Hearn, Bergson, Nietzsche, Pater and
Freud solved by seeking liberties for the instinct. Pentheus, who
represents reason, is the enemy of Bacchus, but fascinated by him, loses
his life; reason leads to death when it makes no concession to the
instincts. The play was a protest by Euripides against his own
moralizing tendencies. The lesson of the sages Cadmus and Tiresius is,
in the words of Nietzsche, that we must display a diplomatically
cautious concern in the presence of the emotional forces. Don't trifle
with poetry and the ecstasies that produce it.
The older interpretation, which even Pater adopted in his _Greek
Studies_, that Euripides wrote the play as a repentance for his liberal
views and to signify his return to the conservatism of the Greek
religion, is no longer held. Gilbert Murray and others have also shown
the fallacy of this view, but Nietzsche anticipated them.
The most primitive and universal ecstasy is that which is concerned with
the attraction of the sexes. Poetry after all deals chiefly with love,
for in the relations of the sexes we have the source of most of the
pleasurable and painful emotions of humanity. Sexual love even when most
hidden is at the root of all love between the sexes. It is for this
reason that we can still appreciate the oldest lyric poetry of different
nations.
True, two of our greatest of modern poets, Wordsworth and Whitman,
dealt hardly at all with romantic love, and other poets like Shelley and
Swinburne have written besides love poetry, passionate defences of
liberty and republicanism. But still it is the relations of the sexes
which most interests people in a play, a novel or a poem.
And the love poetry of the world is naturally to be found in prose as
well as in verse. Many of our modern poets in their love poetry have not
given us any better poetry than some of Heloise's love letters in prose.
Love is the foundation of poetry and for this reason poetry always will
be with us, and probably more so in prose than in verse. We want
literature that deals with it, and we like love poetry whether in the
prose letters of Keats, the Carlyles, the Brownings and Madame
Lespinasse, or in the novels of Hardy, Turgenev, Tolstoy, Balzac, or in
the verse of Hafiz, Burns, Shelley, Browning, Heine or Verlaine.
Professor Woodberry has made a special plea in his _Inspiration of
Poetry_ for a return of poetry to poetic madness. Emotion is the chief
and most important element of poetry. "Emotion" as Woodberry says, "is
the condition of their (the poets') existence; passion is the element of
their being." When we think of the great figures in fiction who are to
us the most poetic, we think of Oedipus, Orestes, Hamlet, Lear, Macbeth,
Goriot, Grandet, Arthur Dimmesdale, Jean Valjean, Anna Karenina, Oswald
Alving. Passion is the element that makes a character poetic. But any
emotion in which the poet steeps his poems, interests us. We read Heine,
Byron, Burns, Verlaine, because we wish to find our own emotions
expressed. But not every petty feeling, like the shades and nuances we
find in much verse, is great poetry, nor is the record of every trivial
event important poetry.
But emotions described by the poet affect people differently. I may
find great emotion in reading about a man who sacrifices himself for a
great and unpopular idea, but others may not be interested in that man
or his idea and hence will not be moved by the work. Such a work is
poetry to me and like minded readers. Further, differences of
intellectual outlook on the part of the readers count in determining
poetry. Socrates, Buddha, Bruno and Galileo are poetic figures to us
to-day; they have been enshrined in poetry and history and we accept
many of their ideas. But to their contemporaries who rejected them they
were not poetic figures. Who knows but that there are figures to-day we
scoff at who may have a halo of poetry in history?
A distinct but by no means essential quality of the literature of
ecstasy is that of pain. There is more pain depicted in the world's
literature than pleasure. In his _The Nature of Poetry_, Edmund Clarence
Stedman speaks of a certain sadness or melancholy in the poetry of the
nineteenth century but he might have said this was true of the poetry of
any century. Most poetry is sad, for life often is, and the poet is
naturally interested in and pays most attention to the painful emotions
that trouble him. Tragedy and elegy (and the term elegy was used by the
Romans not only to bemoan the dead, but to deplore sad love affairs) are
predominant in all literature, prose and verse.
We always find a poet's outburst of sorrow interesting. The poems of the
Hebrews, Persians, Arabians, Chinese and Japanese may be read by us
because they voice the sorrows that are universal to man. Grief is the
substance of poetry and in the public mind there has always been an
association between poetry and sadness; as Shelley said--"our sweetest
songs are those that told the saddest thought."
It is assumed that Christianity made poetry sad but this is not so, for
there is sad poetry in the Old Testament and among the Romans and the
Orientals who never embraced Christianity. Poetry is sad because it is
intertwined with human nerves. The most frequent note in poetry is
wailing and lamentation, self-pity and passionate rebuke.
In Professor William A. Neilson's _Essentials of Poetry_, there is an
interesting chapter on sentimentalism in poetry, in which the author
dwells on the sentimentalism in the poetry of the English Romantic
School. He defines it as the cultivation of an emotion for the sake of
the thrill. Most certainly there can be no great poetry where the
sentimentalism is forced, where it becomes ridiculous, where it bubbles
over and becomes monotonous. Sentimentalism often characterizes popular
poetry and if the public is likely to err in judging poetry it is
particularly likely to confuse sentimentalism with normal human
emotions. Yet it is hard often to draw the line between sham emotions
and genuine sentiment.
The poet is bound to be always sentimental to an extent because he must
wear his heart on his sleeve. No one need be ashamed of unadulterated
emotions, for life is made up of them.
Besides, nationalities differ. The Irish, the Jews and the Russians, for
example, do not consider their own poems sentimental because these are
genuine records of actual feelings characteristic of sentimental
peoples; to be sure, such expressed emotions may appear as sentimental
to the rest of the world. Many think that the emotion of pity, and also
sympathy for the criminal that we find in Russian novels is rather
sentimental and nauseating, but it is genuine Russian emotion.
We should be on our guard, however, in regarding sentimentalism as
poetry. The public loves cheap popular songs and mushy lachrymose
verses. The many poems, stories and plays about "mother," "baby," "the
flag," "home," "our country," etc., are often drivelling sentimentalism
and not poetry.
Ecstasy was the keynote of Oriental poetry. We are fortunate in having a
translation in the _Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society_ for 1901 and
of ecstasy from Al Ghazzali's work on the _Re-vivifying of the Sciences
of the Faith_. Ghazzali (1060-1111) was the greatest apologist for Islam
and is known as "The Proof of Islam." He was held to be the only man who
was worthy of being a prophet, next to Mohammed himself. He
unfortunately dealt the death blow to Mohammedan philosophy and Averroes
wrote against him. But no one among Arabs had as grand a conception of
ecstasy in connection with poetry as he did. He was influenced by the
Persian Sufis and defined ecstasy in a very modern manner. We may
dispense with his mystic conception of it and pay attention only to his
definition of it in its relation to poetry. Great admirer as he was of
the _Koran_ he recognized that poetry is more in accord with human
nature than that work, and he quotes an authority to the effect that our
being constituted of fanciful desires makes us more moved by poets than
by the word of God. He finds various reasons for the power of poetry
over us, the principal one being its quality of ecstasy. He sees that
poetry has a mission in conveying ecstasy; that one of its uses is to
arouse us to lamentation, to joy, to love, to courage and to religion.
He analyzes the tender longing caused by love poetry, though, good
Moslem that he was, he is always discriminating between poetry that
arouses a lawful love, and that which has mere lust as its object.
His main contribution, however, to the philosophy of ecstasy is his
recognition of its identity with the unconscious. He quotes some one to
the effect that music and singing do not produce in the heart what is
not in it but stir up what exists there. Ecstasy to him is the result of
hearing and of understanding what is heard and applying it to an idea
which occurs to the hearer. It is a condition produced in the hearer's
soul due to knowledge or emotion, and the condition is varied. The
following passage is especially worthy of quotation: "As for the states,
how many a man gets so far as to perceive in his heart, on some occasion
which may appear in it, a contraction or an expansion, yet he does not
know its cause! And a man sometimes thinks about a thing, and it makes
an impression on his soul. Then he forgets the cause, but the impression
remains upon his soul, and he feels it. And, sometimes, the condition
which he feels is a joy which arose in his soul on his thinking about a
cause which produces joy; or it may have been a sorrow; then he who was
thinking about it forgets it, but feels in the impression its
consequence. And sometimes that condition is a strong condition which a
word expressing joy or sorrow does not indicate clearly and for which he
cannot come upon a suitable expression for what was intended."
Al Ghazzali gives then, as the essence of ecstasy, its unconscious
nature. Ecstasy is related to longing for something unknown. All people
experience in their hearts states demanding things unknown to them. He
compares the situation to that of the innocent and ignorant youth in
puberty who is in a state unexplained to him. Al Ghazzali is one of the
first of modern critics to formulate the theory of ecstasy as the end of
poetry, and his argument explains the vogue of love and mystic poetry.
He recurs, it is true, to the influence of metre in poetry in inducing
ecstasy, but he is always thinking of the ecstasy of love of man and
God as the element of poetry, and in this he is a predecessor of
Tolstoy. He also gives rules as to one's behavior in the ecstatic state
and does not sanction undue madness.
A much higher form of the literature of ecstasy than the product of the
immoral rites of Dionysus or the mystic poetry of Persia is the prophecy
as it was known and delivered among the ancient Hebrews. Indeed,
prophecy is the ideal form of the literature of ecstasy and represents
the zenith of its achievement. It is the emotional verbal utterance of
the unconscious of the poet, who is usually in a state of ecstasy, and
who, as passages in the Bible testify, receives his message in a vision
or dream. The act of prophesying was even contagious. The early prophets
were like dancing dervishes in their prophesying and influenced others
to do as they did. We recall how Saul stripped himself naked. The Hebrew
word prophecy means utterance and the idea of foretelling the future was
incidental to it. If the idea of futurity emanated from prophets, it was
such insight as any gifted person may experience when he notes certain
facts from which he can predict inevitable results. But the ecstatic
state was always associated with the idea of prophecy, the only person,
according to the account of the Bible, exempt from this state being
Moses. The prophetic state was not allied to divination but resulted
from moral and aesthetic inspiration such as we find in modern poets.
When the Bible says, God spoke to the prophet, or the hand of God
touched him, it means that the prophet was in a state of ecstasy due to
a highly developed moral and social viewpoint. The true prophet's
ecstasy was not accompanied by immorality or superduced by drugs or
physical abuse. Music, however, was at one time used to produce the
prophetic state. The aesthetic mechanism of the ancient prophets was no
different from that of any great poet with a message of modern times.
Moses Maimonides in his _Guide to the Perplexed_ analyzes the ecstatic
state of prophecy and his analysis may be applied to any high form of
poetic inspiration.
Prophecy was, according to Maimonides, an emanation sent forth to man's
rational faculty and then to his imaginative faculty; it consisted in
the most perfect development of the imaginative faculty; the logical and
imaginative faculties had to be balanced in the prophet; he overflowed
with the frenzy of ecstasy to help his fellow-men and could not rest
even at risk of personal suffering; he had courage and intuition; he
reserved his message in a dream or a vision.
The psychology of the prophetic inspiration has been studied by many of
the higher critics of the Bible. One of the best books on the subject is
_The Psychology of Prophecy_ by Dr. Jacob H. Kaplan, Philadelphia 1908,
(Julius H. Greenstone) who says:
The ecstasy of the wild and mad kind was seen only in the
early days of Hebrew prophecy, when wine and dance and music
and other external means were used for bringing about this
state, but the subdued elevated ecstasy due to religious
temperament and patriotic fervor, due to constant and profound
contemplation, was certainly the characteristic of the later
prophets. . . . Ecstasy is usually the spring whence all the
other prophetic streams flow.
While the Greeks mingled reason with inspiration to produce poetry, the
prophets went further, and interpenetrated their ecstasy with a high
sense of social justice. An ecstatic state, with a keen intellect, a
high moral outlook, and a noble social ideal characterized the prophet.
His state of ecstasy was due to this highly developed social
conscience. He was not so much concerned with religious rites as with
the decline of the nation's ideals of justice. The prophet of that day
fulminated against the economic evils of society. He was possessed of an
exalted type of aesthetic soul, the ecstasy to social justice. No
literature gives us such types of men who rebuke unjust kings as we find
in the stories of Nathan and David, Elijah and Ahab, Jeremiah and
Hezekiah. No literature shows us such courageous types as Amos and
Isaiah. They were not flatterers, these men who risked their lives in
shouting back to eastern autocratic monarchs their iniquities. They did
not say what society or public opinion wanted them to say but what they
felt was their duty. They overflowed not with the immoral and insane
ecstasy of the rites of Dionysius, but the ecstasy of the man who loves
his neighbor as himself, of the man who would not have the rich crush
the poor, of the man who sought kindness for the stranger, the
oppressed, the widow, the fatherless.
And the prophets, in spite of their virulency, produced the highest
forms of artistic beauty. Not all the revolutions of opinions and
changes in religious beliefs have made them obsolete. Shaw once said,
substitute the word ideals for the word idols, in the Bible, and you
have messages that are still true.
So the prophets instead of being miracle performers, foretellers of the
future, preachers of theology, are really poets of ecstasy, with a
social message revealed in a dream. The old word of God, in the form of
a high social ideal, to-day is still making prophets. Shelley, Ibsen and
Ruskin have done work that is akin to the prophets of old; they have
given us works of art inspired by a state of ecstasy springing from the
possession of social ideals. Santayana rightly regards the prophet, one
who portrays the ideals of experience and destiny, as the greatest
poet. (See _Poetry and Religion._)
Nor did the prophets of old sing their messages in artificial form. They
did not count their syllables and give us metre, though they indulged in
The prophets had a true conception of what constituted a high form of
poetry, an ecstatic production in prose with a social ideal behind it.
Ecstasy was the first condition of their poetry but it was not
pathological as with monks who tortured their bodies, or decadent poets
who resorted to drugs.
If there is a high form of the literature of ecstasy it surely is that
in which the ecstasy of humanitarianism is described. It is that which
shows a man with a highly developed sense of social justice, who is
making sacrifices because he observes the misery of many due to the
privileged few. _Don Quixote_ is one of the greatest poems because the
knight wants to help mankind, even though he is insane and never recks
his own bruises, but persists and is laughed at by all.
In speaking of the literature of ecstasy, something should be said about
De Quincey's famous distinction of the literature of knowledge and the
literature of power. He defined the former as that which teaches and the
latter as that which moves. In the literature of power he included also
that which taught by means of passions, desires and emotions and that
which had its field of action in relation to the great moral capacities
of man. The literature of power, according to De Quincey, includes that
which appeals to the reason and understanding through the affections.
It restores "to man's mind the ideals of justice, of hope, of truth, of
mercy, of retribution." De Quincey included under the literature of
power, prose as well as verse, fairy tales and romances as well as
tragedies and epic poems.
The question is, what relation is there between De Quincey's idea of the
literature of power and that of the literature of ecstasy. Of course he
included under the literature of power his masterly prose poems; also
all his imaginative writings. Now, the _Confessions of an Opium Eater_,
for instance, belongs only in parts to the literature of ecstasy,
noticeably in the dream phantasies. By the literature of power De
Quincey meant all literature except science. The only illustration of
the literature of knowledge he gives is Newton's _Principia_, and the
marked characteristics he finds in this as in all literature of
knowledge is that it may be and usually is superseded by later
discoveries. The literature of power in his opinion is permanent; this
statement is not true when we think of the many imaginative works of the
past that have no longer any message or appeal to us.
The point is that De Quincey's literature of power includes not only
poetry in verse and prose, but the entire field of general literature
which hovers on poetry, or in which the poetry is diffused so that we
call it prose literature. The literature of ecstasy then is the more
emotional literature of power, that section of it where the ecstasy is
concentrated. It would include chiefly the impassioned prose and prose
phantasies of De Quincey's own work.
De Quincey was no art-for-art's-sake man, and he recognized the
importance of the rational and the moral element in the sphere of the
literature of power.
There remains a distinction between power and ecstasy. De Quincey does
not identify power with ecstasy (a term he does not even use) even
though he demands a moving effect in the literature of power. He does
not contend that the emotion should be concentrated and hold complete
sway over the author. His literature of power would include, for
example, all good novels or histories in their entirety. To us only
those portions of such novels and histories where the passion is
concentrated belong to the literature of ecstasy or poetry.
Literature of ecstasy is always poetry, literature of power is not,
being rather the equivalent of _belles lettres_, reaching the heights of
poetry only at times.
The literature of ecstasy is all writing, in verse or prose, wherever an
emotional atmosphere hovers, where a feeling is concentrated, and hence
it is really poetry. Poetry is the language of ecstasy and ecstasy is
that possessive faculty of the imagination capable "of projecting itself
into the very consciousness of its object, and again of being so wholly
possessed by the emotion of its object that in expression it takes
unconsciously the tone, the color and the temperature thereof." (James
Russell Lowell: _The Function of the Poet._ "The Imagination." P. 70.)
ecstasy.
William Lyon Phelps in the preface to his _The Advance of English Poetry
in the Twentieth Century_ claims that the influence of Donne has never
been greater than at present.
"Hebrew poetry is
Prose with a sort of heightened consciousness.
'Ecstasy affords
The occasion and expediency determines the form.'"
MARIANNE MOORE in _Others_ (1916).
Aristotle was the first critic who placed little stress on the
importance of metre in poetry. If the critics had followed him, instead
of merely referring to his _Poetics_ and trying to discover the
"borderland between prose and poetry," there probably would have been
little confusion as to what is poetry. He saw there was poetry in the
prose mimes of Sophron and Xenarchus and in the dialogues of Socrates,
though these were not classified as poetry. Incidentally he found little
poetry in Empedocles, who in spite of his metre was primarily a
physicist. The passage from the _Poetics_ is worth quoting entire for it
contains the nucleus of all arguments for prose poetry. I quote from S.
H. Butcher's translation:
For there is no common term we could apply to the mimes of
Sophron and Xenarchus and the Socratic dialogues on the one
hand; and, on the other, to poetic imitations in iambic,
elegaic, or any similar metre. People, do, indeed, add the
word "make" or "poet" to the name of the metre, and speak of
elegaic poets, or epic (that is, hexameter) poets, _as if it
were not the imitation that makes the poet, but the verse that
when a treatise on medicine or natural science is brought out
in verse, the name of poet is by custom given to the author;
and yet Homer and Empedocles have nothing in common but the
metre, so that it would be right to call the one poet, the
other physicist rather than poet. On the same principle, even
if a writer in his poetic imitation were to combine all
metres, as Chaeremon did in his _Centaur_, which is a medley
composed of metres of all kinds, we should bring him too under
the general term poet.
He also says: "The Poet or maker should be the maker of plots rather
than of verse; since he is a poet because he imitates, and what he
imitates is actions."
Aristotle's idea that metre is an unessential element in determining
poetry has never really taken root in literary criticism. It was voiced
by men like Erasmus and Savonarola, and was again restated by the
Italian critic Castelvetro, who in his commentary on Aristotle's
_Poetics_ (1570) said that verse is not the essence of poetry, that it
does not distinguish it but clothes it, and that therefore matter and
not metre is the test of poetry. He believes like Aristotle, that metre
aids poetry, but that the imitation or creation itself determines it.
George Saintsbury in his scholarly and fascinating _History of Criticism
in Europe_ cannot forgive Aristotle for this "pestilent heresy," as he
calls it. He severely berates Wordsworth and Coleridge for having
supported it. He attacks all the critics who countenance it. He adulates
Dante's treatise _De Vulgari Eloquentia_ as an antidote to the heresy,
because Dante wants the rhythm (as well as the diction) of poetry to be
different from that of prose.
But we are learning to-day that metre is not only an unnecessary element
in poetry, but often an artificial, hampering encumbrance, frequently
vitiating the poetical quality of a poem.
Yet Professor Saintsbury has given us in his _History of English Prose
Rhythm_ some of the finest emotional and rhythmical passages from
English prose writers. He chose the selections primarily for their
rhythm and not for their emotional qualities, yet most of the passages
are poems. His book practically convinces one that nearly all the great
English writers of prose wrote not only rhythmical prose, but emotional
or ecstatic prose, or poetry. Professor Saintsbury finds the essence of
prose rhythm, in variety and divergence, and he divides prose into three
kinds, according to the rhythm. These are hybrid verse-prose, pure
highly rhythmed prose, and prose in general. In the first class he
includes much of the Bible, especially where the parallelisms are
present, Anglo Saxon poetry, Ossian, Blake's _Prophetic Books_ and Walt
Whitman. He no doubt would include free verse here. But this so-called
"hybrid verse prose" is really highly rhythmed prose generally arranged
in verse form. There is no real distinction between the two forms.
Poetry in prose, however, does not depend on the rhythm. The only effect
on the reader of reading the chapter on "Rhythm as the Essential Fact of
Poetry" in Professor Gummere's book _The Beginnings of Poetry_ is to
convince him that the learning amassed there does not prove the
professor's thesis. For example Gummere cites Bagehot's statement, "the
exact line which separates grave novels in verse like _Aylmer's Field_
or _Enoch Arden_ from grave novels not in verse like _Silas Marner_ and
_Adam Bede_, we own we cannot draw with any confidence," and thus
comments: "Adam Bede remains prose, and Enoch Arden is commonly set down
as poetry and there an end." This impatient remark does not do away with
the fact that the story of Hetty's troubles after she had met Arthur
Dimmesdale, and the scene of the interview with her in prison by Dinah
Morris are two examples that fulfill every definition of poetry, even to
irregular rhythm. Some of the free verse poets have given us
compositions made up of the outbursts of people in distress, with their
story in simple language like Hetty Sorrel's tale.
My contention then is that what decides whether a composition is poetry
is not the rhythm but the ecstasy. The academic critics have found an
argument for rhythm in the fact that when a man is moved, the expression
of his emotions tends towards rhythmical language. This is certainly
very often true, but the rhythmical character of language in these cases
is entirely different from that in verse, for in verse you have a
patterned regular rhythm obeying an artificial law of accents, a
continued series of rise and ebb of the voice that must not break down
for hundreds and even thousands of monotonous lines. In the rhythm of
the natural language of emotion you have no rules or fetters on how the
accents should be distributed. You have rhythmical and unrhythmical
lines, regular and irregular arrangements of accents, all thrown
together. No pattern is present, and no uniformity or similarity of any
kind is kept up. This is the language of poetic prose.
If I say that rhythm is not necessary in poetry, I merely mean that no
patterned or strong rhythm is necessary, for all prose is more or less
irregularly rhythmical. Often the prose rhythm is more marked than the
rhythm of metre, as you may find out by comparing passages from Whitman
or Pater with let us say some of the blank verse of Wordsworth.
Professor Patterson claimed that all prose has rhythm, and he called
prose "syncopated rhythm." He rightly pointed out that passages of prose
have a rhythm which in nowise differs from the rhythm of free verse. He
refuses to regard free verse, as some seek to do, as a third medium for
poetic expression. He shows that the arrangement of free verse into
irregular lines merely calls attention to the rhythms. All prose may be
arranged as free verse and all free verse as prose. Since such is the
case, all literature of ecstasy in prose has rhythm besides ecstasy and
should certainly be called poetry. Dr. Patterson made one error,
however, to which Dr. Cary F. Jacob calls attention in her _Foundations
and Nature of Verse_. Prose may have rhythm but it has no continuity of
progress in the rhythms, which must eventually break down; it has no
intention of continuous rhythmic flow. But poetry, I urge, may exist in
prose without a continuity of progress of rhythms or even without rhythm
at all--(after all, in spite of Dr. Patterson, there is unrhythmical
prose).
The view that rhythm is vital to poetry is fallacious. Accentuation at
unequal intervals of time no more creates or heightens poetic fervor
than, as was formerly supposed, measured stress on syllables did so. If
the prime motive of an unrhythmical prose work, in whole or part, is the
communication of an emotion or the ecstatic treatment of an idea, that
production is emphatically a poem; or at least some portions of it are
separately entitled to that name. If you deny it you will be compelled
to maintain that the able unrhythmical prose translations we have of the
Greek and Latin poets contain no poetry. In fact the best way to judge
if a composition in verse is poetry is, as Goethe and Hearn said, to
translate it into the prose of another language; if poetic emotions are
not then revealed, rest assured that they were never present in the
original work. When the rhyme, metre and rhythm have been abstracted and
the poetic fire still glows almost undiminished, we have the best proof,
first that its existence did not depend upon the use of verbal measures
and sounds, and secondly, that the poetry is not lost even when
transferred into the prose of another tongue.
The first question the reader will now ask is: "Well, what then
constitutes the difference between prose and poetry if you take away
the distinguishing feature of rhythm?" And some misguided critics assert
that the term prose poetry is a hybrid and a contradiction in terms. The
embarrassment of the former and the misconception of the latter will
disappear if they remember that the opposite of prose is not poetry, but
verse or metre. As Coleridge said, science is the proper antithesis of
poetry. An unemotional presentation of dull facts is, however, the real
antithesis.
Poetry is absolutely independent of any adornment it may be given, such
as rhyme, metre, or, as I am especially trying to show, rhythm; even
though it is true that emotional language may tend to become rhythmical.
Verse is simply an ordering of words so that the modulation by the voice
especially attracts the ear by the regularity of stress. We have
stories, dramas and essays in different measures of verse just as we
have them in prose. Description, narration, exposition, even argument
and exclamation, appear in verse as well as in prose. There are, as it
has always been recognized, innumerable products in verse that from the
nature of their contents are destitute of the attributes of poetry.
Humorous and didactic efforts, mere jokes or commonplace sermons, do not
become poetical because they are put in metre or rhythm. Abstract
philosophy, concrete science and barren theology remain arid and
unemotional discourses even in the epics of Dante and Milton. A bare and
not particularly interesting statement of facts or a procession of dull
and platitudinous ideas is, even in verse, anything but poetry. In the
range of the world's metrical writings the poems are few and far
between.
On the other hand, it has always been recognized that there were prose
compositions that partook of the nature of poetry or were replete with
poetical parts. It was difficult to classify this literature, for the
extreme beauty and emotion which pervaded it lifted it above ordinary
prose and yet because of the absence of measure it was not classified as
poetry. The first English critic who perceived that the authors of such
work were really poets and should be designated by their appropriate
name was Sir Philip Sidney. He showed that verse was but an ornament and
did not make poetry, and that there were many poets, among whom he named
Xenophon, who never versified. Shelley, however, has given the widest
vogue to the feeling that the distinction between poets and prose
writers was a vulgar error. He maintained that philosophers like Bacon
and Plato, historians like Herodotus, Plutarch and Livy, authors of
revolutions in opinion such as Jesus and Rousseau, were poets.
Coleridge held that the object of poetry was to communicate pleasure,
and remarked: "But the communication of pleasure may be the immediate
object of a work not metrically composed; and that object may have been
in a high degree attained, as in novels and romance. Would then the mere
superaddition of metre, with or without rhyme, entitle these to the name
of poems? The answer is, that nothing can permanently please, which does
not contain in itself the reason why it is so, and not otherwise. . . .
The writings of Plato, and Bishop Taylor, and the _Theoria Sacra_ of
Burnet, furnish undeniable proof that poetry of the highest kind may
last without metre, and even without the contradistinguishing objects of
a poem."
"There are also prose poets," said Emerson in his essay on "Poetry and
Imagination" in _Letters and Social Aims_. "Thomas Taylor, the
Platonist, for instance, is really a better man of imagination, a better
poet, or perhaps I should say, a better feeder to a poet, than any man
between Milton and Wordsworth. Thomas Moore had the magnanimity to say,
'If Burke and Bacon were not poets (measured lines not being necessary
to constitute one), he did not know what poetry meant.' And every good
reader will easily recall expressions or passages in works of pure
science which have given him the same pleasure which he seeks in
professed poets."
Emerson also said he heard the Germans considered the author of
_Tristram Shandy_ a greater poet than Cowper, and that Goldsmith was a
poet more because of the _Vicar of Wakefield_ than the _Deserted
Village_.
Hazlitt stated that there were some prose works that approached poetry
without absolutely being poetry, instancing _Robinson Crusoe_,
_Pilgrim's Progress_, and the _Decameron_.
Heine spoke of _Don Quixote_ as a poem. Fredrick Schlegel called
_Wilhelm Meister_ poetry. Brandes regards Lord Beaconsfield a poet.
Matthew Arnold characterized Chateaubriand, Senancour and Guerin poets.
Balzac considered himself a poet and Ibsen in mentioning his prose
dramas often used the word "poems."
The habit of calling productions in metre or rhythm poetry has been so
strongly ingrained in us that we denominate every lengthy performance in
verse a poem _in toto_. Before Poe, Coleridge said that "a poem of any
length neither can be nor ought to be all poetry." Poe gave us the
reasons for this proposition and demonstrated to us that a long epic
poem is but a series of short poems connected by uninspired passages in
metre. The same thing may be said of literary verse performances of
moderate length. To those who object to using the word "poem" in
connection with any prose composition one may reply that these, like
verse productions, are also often made up of poetical parts here and
there; they simply lack regular rhythm and this is not a sufficient
line of demarcation as to what constitutes poetry and what does not.
There are many short stories in verse which are known as poems while
there are many poetical tales and sketches in prose which no one finds
to be poetry, although they often contain more of it than many specimens
in measure. I think Poe's _Eleonora_ with its description of the Valley
of Many Colored Grass and Hawthorne's _Haunted Mind_ are greater poems,
though in prose, than most of Holmes' and Bryant's verse poems are. I
see no reason why we should not designate as poetry, prose tales where
ecstasy and emotion predominate. Kipling's _Brushwood Boy_ or Bret
Harte's _Outcasts of Poker Flat_ is as poetical, I believe, as any tale
in Longfellow's _Tales of a Wayside Inn_. The same laws of emotional
appeal are working in the one as in the other; a similar artistic stamp
is printed on all these stories. In fact, Longfellow's tales are
inferior in the quality and quantity of poetry to the stories specified.
His compositions could easily be arranged in prose and the stories of
Kipling or Harte could be transposed into metrical verse. The transfer
would not affect the poetry in either of them.
It is a confused system of literary classification which does not permit
calling these tales of Harte and Kipling poetry, but crowns the same
writers' doggerel verses like _The Heathen Chinee_ and _Fuzzy Wuzzy_
with the title "poems."
To bring sharply before the reader's mind the idea that a piece in verse
is often not poetry and that a prose passage frequently is a poem, I
will quote at random two passages.
One is from a work that is rich with poetry and written by one of
England's greatest poets and yet the particular section, though in
metre, is but a dry statement of facts. I quote from Wordsworth's
_Michael_, one of the finest things in English literature, yet
unpoetical in the first part:
Upon the forest side in Grasmere Vale
There dwelt a Shepherd, Michael was his name.
An old man stout of heart, and strong of limb.
His bodily frame had been from youth to age
Of an unusual strength; his mind was keen,
And in his Shepherd calling he was prompt
And watchful more than ordinary men.
Here are unpoetical lines which might have been written in prose, but
Wordsworth had to give us some preliminary information so that we could
follow his story. Incidentally, he has the reputation for having much
prosy material in the body of his work.
The other passage I quote is purposely a translation from a foreign
novel and yet it has not lost any of its poetry. The paragraph, of which
I give part, is a poem and part of a larger one in prose. It is from
D'Annunzio's _Triumph of Death_ and describes the music in Wagner's
"Tristan and Isolde":
And in the orchestra, spoke every eloquence, sang every joy,
wept every misery, that the human voice had ever expressed.
The melodies emerged from the symphonic depths, developing,
interrupting, superposing, mingling, melting into one another,
dissolving, disappearing to again appear. A more and more
restless poignant anxiety passed over all the instruments and
expressed a continual and ever vain effort to attain the
inaccessible. In the impetuosity of the chromatic progressions
there was the mad pursuit of a happiness that eluded every
grasp, although it shone ever so near, etc.
I shall show more fully that our definitions of what is poetry and what
is a poem have been faulty. The error is so perceptible that it is
surprising that so few critics have detected it. Meanwhile I will give
my definitions:
_Poetry is not a department of literature in the sense that the novel or
the essay or the drama is, but is an atmosphere which bathes literature
whenever ecstasy and emotion are present. It is not a distinct division
of art as literature, music or painting is, for poetry is the very
essence of all these arts whether it is transmitted by words, sounds or
colors. It is the ecstatic emotional spirit which pervades all good
literature (or any of the arts) whether in verse or prose, in their
finest parts. It is an aesthetic quality which gives tone to a literary
work or any portion or portions of it. It may exist without figures of
or free verse._ Let us have no more such classification of literature as
fiction, drama, essay, criticism, _poetry_, etc. There is fiction in
verse and there is prose fiction; there are verse dramas and prose
plays, etc., and any of these may be steeped in poetry. However, the
customary lyric verse may be comprised under the heading of poetry not
because of the measure, but on account of the poetic emotion that
usually characterizes it. Let us also not speak of the arts like music,
painting, sculpture and poetry when instead of the last we mean
literature, for poetry is a quality of all the arts including
literature. Poetry is the spirit of ecstasy and emotion which pervades
the arts like music, painting, sculpture and literature, and hence it
may be found in every branch of literature whether in verse or prose,
like the drama, fiction and the essay.
We are now in a position to define what a poem is. Critics are agreed
that it must consist of the artistic expression of words which arouse
the reader's emotion, but they have insisted that these words be
rhythmically arranged. I think if the latter limitation is withdrawn,
all our confusion as to what is a poem will disappear. _A poem is any
literary composition, whether in verse or prose, which as a whole is an
imaginative creation, a vehicle of emotion, an expression of ecstasy; or
that portion or every portion of such a composition where the emotion or
ecstasy has been concentrated. It does not follow that the work as a
whole is necessarily poetry. Its most natural language is prose or free
verse._
Poems may therefore be found in imaginative philosophical works like
Plato's _Symposium_, _Phaedrus_, _Republic_ and other dialogues, Bacon's
_Essays_, Schopenhauer's _World as Will and Idea_, Nietzsche's _Thus
Spake Zarathustra_, Emerson's _Essays_, in critical works like Pater's
_Renaissance_, Ruskin's _Modern Painters_, Wilde's _Intentions_, in
histories like Thucydides's _Peloponnesian War_ and Carlyle's _French
Revolution_, in autobiographies like St. Augustine's _Confessions_ and
Rousseau's _Confessions_, in letters like Madame Lespinasse's and Mrs.
Browning's, in diaries like those of Amiel, in novels by Balzac,
Dickens, Hawthorne, Hardy, Tolstoy, etc.
Some of the best poetry is found in the world's prose fiction. For
example, _The Scarlet Letter_ has as good poetry in it as the _Aeneid_.
Like the old epic, it is made up of great poems connected by extended
portions that belongs to general literature, sections that have not
enough emotion to be regarded as poetry nor are yet arid or passionless
enough to be termed science. But the story of Hester Prynne is poetry as
truly as the tale of Dido, and undoubtedly you cannot refuse the
appellation poetry to the chapter in Hawthorne's novel which describes
how Arthur Dimmesdale gets up in the pulpit and confesses to the
congregation his part in Hester Prynne's guilt. The _Aeneid_ is really a
novel in verse.
We are not often moved by metrical writing as we are by the last part of
the chapter in _David Copperfield_ entitled, "A Greater Loss," where we
see the agonizing grief of the elder Pegotty and of Ham over the
elopement of Emily, Ham's betrothed. You recall the love scene telling
of the meeting of Richard and Lucy in Meredith's novel _The Ordeal of
Richard Feverel_, only as poetry. This is how the passage, which being
rhythmical besides, begins:
Golden lie the meadows; golden run the streams; red gold is on
the pine-stems. The sun is coming down to earth, and walks the
fields and the waters.
The sun is coming down to earth, and the fields and the waters
shout to him golden shouts. He comes and his heralds run
before him, and touch the leaves of oaks and the planes and
the beeches lucid green, and the pine stems redder gold;
leaving the brightest footprints upon thickly-weeded barks,
where the foxglove's last upper-bells incline, and the bramble
shoots wander amid moist rich herbage, etc.
If the sphere of poetry has thus been widened to include many
compositions in prose formerly excluded, it has, on the other hand, been
narrowed by omitting much in verse that was formerly admitted into the
domain of the Muses. I refer especially to the whole body of unecstatic
philosophical, scientific and theological discourses in verse which
usurp a name not belonging to them; I refer to much descriptive and
narrative verse that lacks the poetic glow; I would exclude nearly all
of the so-called "light," "occasional" and "humorous" verse. Winnow the
voluminous verse writers and but a modicum of poetry remains.
Critics as a rule agree that neither rhythm nor metre makes a literary
performance poetical if the author's soul does not enter into the work,
but they refuse to countenance the corollary that when unrhythmical
prose is used as a medium for the singer's poetical sentiments the
result should also be called poetry. It is an easy matter to arrange any
fine poetical prose in blank verse or irregular rhythmical lines. Just a
few slight verbal changes are necessary. The new product then fulfills
the conditions of the old theory which demands metre or rhythm. Does it
become poetry because of these unimportant changes? No, these do not
work so miraculous an effect upon the writing. It acquires no higher
qualities than it had before in prose.
I hence fail to see why the _Idylls of the King_ should be alone called
poems and not also parts of Malory's _Morte d'Arthur_, which Tennyson
paraphrased in blank verse. Malory has, however, been deemed a poet by
some critics and any one who will read the lament over the death of Sir
Lancelot will not begrudge the author that title. One admits that the
_Tales_ of La Fontaine and Chaucer's _Canterbury Tales_ are very rich in
poetry, but why say that the original prose stories which these poets
often re-tell in verse (undoubtedly improving them by their own genius)
are not? And who will deny the statement that the best of Scott's
novels, say _The Heart of Midlothian_, contains as much, if not more,
poetry than some of his novels in verse like the _Lady of the Lake_?
Even in his day the reviewers saw that there was no difference between
Scott's verse and prose stories as far as the quality of the poetry was
concerned; indeed they saw that there was more of the divine afflatus in
the latter than there was in the former. In fact the _Quarterly Review_
referred to Scott's novels as poems.
One may even say that the great Shakespeare found in the dramas, tales
and chronicles that were his sources some of the poetry we note in his
plays. Especially is this true in regard to his use of Plutarch. Brandes
has pointed out that _Julius Caesar_ is found in every detail in
Plutarch's Lives of Caesar, Brutus and Mark Anthony. The dramatist
followed the biographer point for point, repeating word for word
passages of North's translation, accepting the characters as they stood
there and repeating all the leading incidents. If _Julius Caesar_
contains poetry, as it certainly does in abundance, then surely those
lives of Plutarch which were followed by Shakespeare must also possess
it.
Nor can I understand why the parts of Shakespeare's plays which are in
prose and are often superior to many portions in blank verse should also
not be called poetry. Take the first scene of the fifth act of
_Macbeth_, where Lady Macbeth is walking in her sleep. The entire
section, though prose, is one of the most poetic pieces in the entire
drama. If the passage had been written in blank verse it could not have
been improved. The poetry is there in the scene itself and not in any
possible metre. Other lines might be cited, like Hamlet's remarks to
Guildenstern, who tried to pry out his secret and play upon him as upon
a pipe; or his reflections on what a wonderful piece of work was man; or
his comments over Yorick's skull. All these selections are in
impassioned prose and are as much entitled to the rank of poetry as are
most of the blank verse of the drama. Hamlet's advice to the players
though art criticism, and prose, is so lit up with poetic glamor that it
deserves the name poetry more than the metrical version of some of the
moral commonplaces in the play.
One may ask various questions of the critic who clings to the old
definition that metre or rhythm must accompany poetry. Why should
Conrad's supreme poetic description of a storm at sea in his _Nigger of
the Narcissus_ not be called a poem, when you designate by this word
Virgil's famous description in dactylic hexameters in the first book of
the _Aeneid_? Powerful and deservedly renowned as the Virgil passage is,
I venture to say that it does not as a poem rank higher than some of
Conrad's descriptions. One would wish to be informed where the story of
ingratitude in Balzac's novel _Pere Goriot_ is any the less poetical
than that of Shakespeare's verse play _King Lear_. Why is the succession
of ideas in Browning's _Rabbi Ben Ezra_ called poetry and not, let us
say, Emerson's essay on _Self-Reliance_? Why call the descriptions of
battles by Homer poems, but not those of Stendhal or Tolstoy or Zola in
_Le Chartreuse de Parme_ or _War and Peace_ or _Le Debacle_? And how can
you on any pretence refuse to include in the category of poetry De
Quincey's famous prose poems _The Dream Fugue_ and _Levana and Our
Ladies of Sorrow_?
Since the critics would not admit that any unrhythmical prose is poetry,
it is little wonder that Baudelaire founded as a distinct and conscious
form the composition he called "poem in prose." We are told by his
translator, Mr. Sturm, that he had dreamed in his days of ambition "of a
miracle of poetical prose, musical without rhythm and without rhyme." He
understood and proved that rhythm was not necessary to poetry. He
derived the idea of this separate form from Poe and Bertrand. He has
been followed by Turgenev, who left us some prose poems which he called
_Senilia_. The reader may recall the love scene in _The House of
Gentlefolk_ and the concluding chapters of _Rudin_ and _Fathers and
Sons_, which are all prose poems. Gorki has written some exquisite prose
poems. One of them, _The March of Man_, is one of the most beautiful
poems ever written. (Translated in _The Cosmopolitan_ for July, 1905.)
Really, every great literary man is a poet, for he is constantly
occupied with ecstasy and human emotions. Do you think Hugo was a poet
only when he chanted in verse and ceased being one when he wrote _Les
Miserables_ or _Notre Dame de Paris_? It is not necessary to use the old
poetical machinery of rhythm, or metaphors or similes, or apostrophe or
personification or any other figure of speech; one may dispense with
allusions to mythology or the use of any but current expressions and
idioms; one may write almost as one talks; and poetry may nevertheless
be produced. When Macpherson in the eighteenth century and Chateaubriand
in the early part of the nineteenth century gave us in imitation of the
old epics the long prose poems _Fingal_ and _Les Martyrs_, respectively,
they sinned artistically only because they were imitators and were
stilted and rhetorical. These books contain excellent poetry in prose;
we to-day can scarcely imagine the vogue they had. Had they been more
natural they would still be read.
I believe the application of the theory of poetry I advocate would work
many changes in literary values. Who can doubt that Ibsen and Balzac are
greater poets than John Hay or Edmund Clarence Stedman, both of whom
have respectable rank elsewhere, the former as a statesman and the
latter as a critic? Yet our system of literary classification stamps
these two as poets because of a few popular and able lyrics in verse,
while Ibsen and Balzac, who wrote in prose, are not even considered
poets, according to academic standards. It is true Ibsen also wrote some
lyrics and a few plays in verse, but he is as much a poet in _The Wild
Duck_ or _The Master Builder_ as he is in _Peer Gynt_ or _Brand_. The
scenes of Oswald losing his mind at the end of _Ghosts_ or of Ella
Rentheim rebuking _John Gabriel Borkman_ for his desertion of her are
magnificent poems. As for the poems of Balzac they are too numerous to
mention. The picture of the miser in _Eugenie Grandet_ is surely poetry.
Balzac regarded his stories _Louis Lambert_, _Seraphita_ and _The Lily
of the Valley_ as poems. Inflated as they occasionally are, they are
suffused with poetical qualities. One could go on selecting poems from
_Cousin Pons_, _The Wild Ass's Skin_, _Lost Illusions_, etc. Balzac and
Ibsen are poets and any definition of poetry that would exclude them as
such is faulty.
Under the new method of distinguishing poets that I seek to promulgate,
many writers will be admitted as such whom the world never dreamt of as
seers. It might astonish some people if I make a claim for Mark Twain as
a poet. But who that has read _Huckleberry Finn_ and recalls the
description of the sunrise on the Mississippi, given in the nineteenth
chapter, will be prone to exclude our greatest imaginative and
philosophical humorist from the ranks of Apollo's servants?
To convince the skeptical, I quote from the famous passage where Huck
fearing he would go to hell if he freed a "nigger" slave, determines to
disclose Jim's whereabouts and writes a note to that effect. We all
recall his mental struggles, how he finally tore the letter, with the
words "All right, I'll _go_ to hell." The few pages telling of the
reflections and memories which led to this decision are certainly
poetry.
I got to thinking over our trip down the river; and I see Jim
before me all the time: in the day and in the night-time,
sometimes moonlight, sometimes storms, and we a-floating
along, talking and singing and laughing. . . . I'd see him
standing my watch on top of his'n, 'stead of calling me, so I
could go on sleeping; . . . and would always call me honey,
and pet me, and do everything he could think of for me, and
how good he always was.
Our definition allows us to include the author of the few lines
beginning "With malice towards none, with charity towards all" as a
poet. Indeed, I have been anticipated in the claim that Lincoln was a
poet, as the Gettysburg speech has been on several occasions called a
poem.
It may be asserted that it is rather difficult to differentiate the
poetical portions of a prose work from the rest. This same problem
confronts us in verse. Who can point out exactly which lines in the
_Iliad_ are poetry? The fact is that there are passages in both prose
and metrical literature that we unhesitatingly call poems because they
instantly transform us. Just as you never doubted that the speeches of
Andromache are poetical and that the catalogue of the ships is not, so
you will find it no problem to discard the tedious descriptions in
Balzac as unpoetical while you accept the emotional sections as poems.
Just as critics have selected the poems from lengthy metrical works,
choosing the story of Margaret from Wordsworth's _Excursion_, for
example, so they could glean the poems of prose literature.
One objection raised to the use of prose as a poetical vehicle is its
tendency to diffusiveness. It is claimed that here there are always
temptations to digress and become trivial; hence we get the interminable
novels and stupendous treatises which as a rule we do not have in verse.
But one may grow verbose and expatiate too much in metre as well: the
matter rests entirely with the author. Note how ponderous are some of
the old epics, the _Iliad_, the _Divine Comedy_ and _Orlando Furioso_.
In modern times Byron's _Don Juan_, Browning's _Ring and the Book_ and
Mrs. Browning's _Aurora Leigh_ are examples of lengthy stories in verse.
All of these books are more voluminous than the prose plays, essays,
short stories, and novelettes to which we are accustomed. The prose poet
may weed out the trifling incidents and expunge the redundant from his
composition as easily as the verse writer. Wordy insignificant passages
in a literary product are the outcome, not of a particular rhythmical
arrangement, such as prose or verse, but of a want of artistic feeling,
to which even great geniuses are at times subject. It does not follow
that a powerful description or an emotional idea or an impassioned state
of mind need tend to diffusiveness if written in prose. The poet who has
learned self-restraint in composing does not lose his sense of
proportion even when writing in prose.
Nor need we prefer the verse form to prose, because, as it is alleged, a
metrical poem gives us the maximum poetry in the fewest words. It is
true we get an immediate thrill out of a rhymed lyric or sonnet, while
we often have to read a few chapters in a novel to get a similar
sensation. Nevertheless this is not because the lyric or sonnet is in
verse and the novel in prose. It was the intention of the verse poet to
captivate us instantly in these forms. Translate the sonnet or lyric
into the prose of another language and the excitement seizes us just as
quickly. Poe's _Raven_ is known to French readers chiefly in a literal
prose translation. They respond to it as quickly as we do, though they
have to forego the rhyme and the metre. The writer of unrhythmical prose
may concentrate any emotions in a short space if he wishes to do so.
Many brief prose poems in literature are dynamos of emotion. Ecstasy can
be concentrated in a short prose poem as readily as in a verse, lyric
or sonnet. The important thing is that the poet record the sentiments
instantly, avoiding preliminaries.
Yet the bulk of the prose we have will not become poetry because of the
new outlook I suggest. It is after all only at times that we can single
out poems in them. Most prose works of merit fall short of being poetry
as a whole or in parts. The ecstasy or emotion is often not concentrated
in any particular part of the work. The facts, notions or ideas are not
emotionally presented. Yet the volume is literature, and is more akin to
poetry than to science. But it is no discredit to a book because it is
just literature and not poetry.
Gurney in his _The Power of Sound_ calls attention to the fact that when
Lessing defined the limits between the plastic arts and poetry, he made
no distinction between verse and prose in his conception of poetry.
Whatever Lessing says about poetry in the _Laocoon_ applies equally well
to prose. True, he uses Homer as an illustration, but he could just as
well have used a modern novel, for the question of metre is never raised
in determining the province of poetry, which he differentiates from that
of painting. The only place he mentions the prose writer is in the
seventeenth section, where he says that the prose writer usually aims
only after intelligibility and clarity, while the poet seeks also to be
vivid. He does not say that the prose writer may not also be a poet if
he is vivid. In fact this is the very inference. He states also that the
verse writer who aims at producing no illusion but addresses the
understanding is not a poet, instancing Virgil when in the _Georgics_ he
describes a cow fit for breeding.
This is then the singular and most remarkable fact about the _Laocoon_
that the author includes all vivid emotional narrative prose under the
term poetry, which he distinguishes from painting. It is easy to see
that his famous distinction, that objects side by side in space or
bodies with their visible properties are the fit subjects for painting,
while actions or objects which succeed each other in time are the
peculiar subjects of poetry, is really also a distinction between the
plastic arts and the prose novel or short story. Painting, according to
Lessing, was descriptive, poetry was narrative. Now narrative properly
is the object of the novel. It is true Lessing defined poetry in a
limited manner, as if it were only narrative literature; but we are
grateful to him for implying that vivid prose narrative is poetry, and
that poetry extends beyond metrical compositions.
It is commonly said that an emotional piece of prose writing is not
poetry, but the raw material for poetry. Even Arthur Symons calls such
warning only poetical substance. One critic has even designated it as a
sort of bastard writing that is neither prose nor poetry. In fact
rhythmical emotional prose has been a thorn in the academic critic's
side. He has become more confused than ever since the vogue of free
verse, some of which though really prose is beyond question poetry. He
no longer refuses the title of poet to Whitman and he shrinks from
denying that the best free verse is poetry. He feels vaguely that since
prose is also often rhythmical, the old definition of poetry as an
emotional piece of rhythmical writing is faulty, for it must include
also emotional rhythmical prose, and he objects to this inclusion.
Professor Lowes, who, in his _Convention and Revolt in Poetry_,
recognizes the similarity between the rhythm of free verse and that of
prose, unsuccessfully solves the problem by saying that poetry is used
in a loose as well as in a more rigid sense and that free verse is an
artistic medium of not fully developed possibilities. He, like most
critics, falls into the error of saying that we cannot include prose
whenever we speak of poetry. Still we must be grateful to Lowes for his
liberal attitude towards new verse forms.
Critics who say that emotional prose should be metrical to be called
poetry remind us of the paraphrasers of a few centuries ago who put the
Psalms into rhyme. They did not make them poetry, they usually robbed
them of it, and spoiled their effect. Even Milton succumbed to the vice.
And Gosse, in his article on "Lyrical Poetry" in the _Encyclopedia
Britannica_, tells us of one Azzi who in 1700 put the book of _Genesis_
into sonnets. Emotional prose, rhythmical or not, is poetry. No one
to-day thinks of employing Matthew Arnold's touchstone theory of poetry
whereby we are to have a few metrical lines of some great poets to apply
as a test as to what is poetry.
It is really strange that with the English prose Bible before them,
critics should have insisted on the metrical element in poetry. And one
must add that parallelisms are not the fundamental features of poetry.
The poetry of Isaiah and David would have been poetry without a single
parallelism. But we need not go to the prophets or the Psalms, where we
have parallelism, for poetry in the Bible: we have it in the narrative
portions, in the stories of Ruth and Joseph. Who does not feel the
poetical emotions surge through him as he comes to the forty-fifth
chapter of _Genesis_, where Joseph reveals himself to his brothers?
Fearing they will be dismayed because they sold him, he assures them
that their criminal deed was just what has enabled him to become a ruler
and save them from starvation. A poet was he who wrote this chapter
beginning with the lines:
Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all that stood by
him; and he cried, "Cause every man to go out from me." And
there stood no man with him, while Joseph made himself known
to his brethren, etc.
We must always remember that the emotional appeal whether in prose or
verse is the same to us. We do not get one kind of ecstasy by reading
poetical prose and another kind by reading verse. Our inner soul is
stirred, our aesthetic faculties are touched in the same way if we read
a beautiful love letter like one in prose of Eloise's, or a love poem in
verse. And it may be said here that no poet has improved upon those
prose epistles by changing them into metrical form. An idea colored with
emotion and a beautiful description give us the same effects in prose as
they do in verse. The test of poetry is in our own souls.
We can find poetry in the most unexpected places, and the reader who
wants to look for it will be able to see that poets like Wordsworth and
Whitman were poets in their prose critical prefaces as well as in the
_Lyrical Ballads_ and _Leaves of Grass_. As a matter of fact, Whitman
used paragraphs from his critical essays, word for word, in _Leaves of
Grass_, but arranged in free verse form.
It is true that at times the poetry cannot be distilled, as it were,
from the body of a prose work; a particular passage cannot be lifted up
and called poetry, though it be such (dependent, however, on what goes
before and after). For example, every reader is thrilled with emotion
when he comes to the conclusion of the chapter in _Vanity Fair_, where
Amelia Sedley is praying for George Osborne, who was lying dead on his
face with a bullet through his heart. This line is poetry, but only by
reason of our taking it into consideration with earlier parts of the
novel. It could not be published alone, for it would be meaningless.
But the same is true of poetry in verse. When Horatio says of Hamlet
"now cracks a noble heart," and hopes that flights of angels will sing
him to his rest, the passage is effective only because we have lived
with Hamlet and felt with him and admired him. Printed alone the words
would mean little. The poetry of a great novel, like that of a verse
play, is not always in isolated passages, but in the entire novel or
play from which it cannot be extracted by quotation.
All lovers of poetry cannot help being indebted to Sir Arthur
Quiller-Couch, who showed he knew what constitutes poetry when he
composed the famous _Oxford Book of English Verse_. But one is grieved
that one must differ with him when it comes to literary criticism. In
his book on the _Art of Writing_ there is a chapter called "On the
Difference Between Verse and Prose" which justifies inversion of the
natural order of words in verse and affirms that this inversion (of
course along with metre and rhyme at will) is the difference between
verse and prose. He uses the old illustration that rhyme, metre and
inversion help the memory, and that since the first poets sang their
poems to the harp, and music and emotion were introduced, everything is
changed down to the natural order of the words.
Now, aside from the fact that not all of the earliest emotional
compositions were sung to the harp, it is admitted on all sides that
poetry is no longer written primarily to be sung to the harp. Hence
there is no further necessity for this inversion of words. The natural
order of prose should be retained in emotional writing, with occasional
deviations. But most certainly this inversion does not constitute the
difference between poetry and non-poetry even if it often does make
verse different from prose.
Sir Arthur gives us a few lines of Milton in the inverse order in which
they were written and says they are verse with the accent of poetry. He
then rewrites them in prose order. The inference is that they no longer
have that accent of poetry. They are not poetry in the prose version,
however, because they were not poetry in the original verse order. He
takes four lines from the second book of _Paradise Regained_, describing
Christ's ascent up a hill, and gives us a prose paraphrase of them. Here
are the lines as Milton wrote them:
Up to a hill anon his steps he reared
From whose high top to ken the prospect round,
If cottage were in view, sheep-cote or herd;
But cottage, herd, or sheep-cote, none he saw.
Here is Quiller-Couch's prose rendering:
Thereupon he climbed a hill on the chance that the view from
its summit might disclose some sign of human habitation--a
herd, a sheep-cote, a cottage perhaps. But he could see
nothing of the sort.
This prose paraphrase really proves that the original had no touch of
poetry. Because the passage as written in metre uses poetic diction like
"anon," and "ken," employs inversion like "steps he reared," "none he
saw," it is assumed that the passage must be poetry, but it is not, for
it lacks ecstasy. It is merely one of the prosaic passages in a
composition that contains poems, and is needed to bridge over the poems.
A prose paraphrase or explanation of a verse poem is always interesting
in helping us understand the nature of poetry. For example, Hearn, a
poet himself, took up many English poems and paraphrased and explained
them to his Japanese students. Some of his paraphrases are actually
greater poems than the originals. Most of the great poems in literature
have been analyzed or paraphrased by biographers and commentators. No
one calls these paraphrases poetry. But are we sure that they are not?
Are we certain that none of the original emotion or ideas are left
intact in the paraphrase? On the contrary, I believe that the poetry
still remains in the paraphrase. True, often the manner of expressing an
idea or emotion is what counts in making it poetry, but expression alone
does not make poetry. Even a metrical, emotional and beautiful utterance
of a commonplace idea sometimes becomes poetry, but I cannot concede
that the prose version of a great verse poem may not be poetry if still
emotionally expressed.
Let me take a concrete instance. The following passage from _Paradise
Lost_ is considered, no doubt justly, poetry, because of the idea, the
emotion and the rhythm (academically speaking):
What though the field be lost?
All is not lost; the unconquerable will,
And study of revenge, immortal hate,
And courage never to submit or yield,
And what is else not to be overcome.
Let us paraphrase this passage and try to retain the idea, the emotion
and a prose rhythm by just changing a few words.
And suppose we lost the battle? We have not lost everything.
We still have our unconquerable will, our plans for revenge,
our eternal hatred, and courage never to give in or surrender,
and above all never to be defeated.
Is this passage poetry or not? I submit that it is, if the original is.
It is rhythmical (though it doesn't have to be so), the original idea is
there, and the passion of the speaker has not been rooted out. All this
proves, then, that much of what we call poetry in verse is either not
poetry at all or that there is more poetry in the prose of the world
than we ever imagined.
Is there any poetry in Lamb's _Tales from Shakespeare_? Beyond doubt;
just as there is poetry in the tales and histories from which
Shakespeare drew his plays. Is there not poetry in the critical
discourses about poets where the critic loses himself in the poet's
emotions and becomes that poet and gives you his spirit, as, for
example, Carlyle does in his study of Burns, or Symonds in his _Greek
Poets_?
All this leads to one conclusion: that we should not be concerned as to
whether a piece of literature is or is not something that may be
included in a definition of poetry, but whether it is a humane,
ecstatic, emotional, thoughtful piece of writing. Do not be worried
where the poetry is. Rest assured it is there somewhere, for we should
judge poetry by the effect on us and not by the compliance with rules of
rhythm or any other rules of composition. And all great literature which
has a similar emotional effect upon us, whether it is in verse or prose,
has poetry in it. Walt Whitman did not insist that his _Leaves of Grass_
be called poetry; yet that is what it turns out to be.
The reader may reply that if poetry is to be found to a large extent in
the prose of the world, all distinctions are broken down as to what
poetry is and is not, and you might as well look for it in the stories
in the newspapers. I gladly accept the challenge: there is poetry in the
newspapers. When the _Spoon River Anthology_ appeared many critics said
it was nothing more than a collection of newspaper obituaries, told in
the first person, that differed from news items only in that the lines
were printed as free verse, and that therefore it was no more poetry
than a newspaper story. On the contrary, it would have been poetry had
it appeared as prose in a newspaper.
I have no doubt many readers will recall newspaper stories that moved
them like a poem. Those especially well written ones of love tragedies
are often poetry; by virtue of their ecstatic nature they arouse our
emotions.
The poetry of our day is not monopolized by dabblers in metre and is not
shared exclusively by readers of verse. It is being written by our prose
writers and occasionally by our journalists, and is being read by the
general public. It is not the heritage of the professor or the critic.
The verse poets and readers are not the only lovers of poetry, but the
great public who reads _Uncle Tom's Cabin_ and _Lorna Doone_ is reading
poetry, albeit not of the highest order.
I do not mean to imply that there is more poetry in the prose writings
of a nation's literature than in its verse writings. The prose writer
usually travels leisurely and waxes ecstatic occasionally. He does not
concentrate his emotions nor seek to depict them immediately. The verse
writer as a rule tries to depict emotions from the start. He is greater
as a poet than many prose writers, because he poetizes, thinking he must
do this naturally in verse, while the prose writer does not believe it
is his duty to do so in prose, but he is often a poet because he cannot
help it. There is more poetry in a volume of Burns or Shelley or Heine
than in a volume of similar length by a prose writer, because these
poets tried to put emotion into every separate portion, no matter how
small. Yet a prose writer can do the same thing if he wants to do so.
Any one who is a great reader of books of travel is impressed by the
fact that in these works there is occasionally literature of ecstasy of
a high order. There are descriptions and narratives recorded with
beauty, vividness, interest; there are reflections, insight into human
nature that often surpass the works of prose fiction and verse poetry we
read. Yet because these works are called "travels," they are not
supposed to contain poems or creative literature. Had the authors given
us as good description in verse, the critics would have called them
poets.
Hearn's books on Japan are after all works of travel, but they contain
poetry or the literature of ecstasy because Hearn was a poet. I am not
claiming for many works of travel a place only as literature, for it is
usually conceded that the best books of travel are literature, but I
urge that many of these books are in parts poetry, and their authors are
poets. It is recognized, however, that Pierre Loti is a poet in his
books of travel. Doughty's _Arabia Deserta_ is full of poetry.
_Robinson Crusoe_ and _Gulliver's Travels_ are but works of travel, and
are poetry because of the ecstatic presentation of ideas. You will find
poems in prose not only in the travels of great writers, like Goethe,
Taine, Heine, in the works of old writers who were chiefly travelers,
like Hakluyt, Mandeville, Marco Polo, but in many volumes that have been
published in our own day.
Anthologies of thousands of poems in prose could be compiled. The prose
of every literature is full of poetry, even concentrated poetry, more or
less rhythmical. You may cull poems out of the prose writings of men in
England to-day, from Hardy, Moore, Yeats, Symons, Kipling, Hudson,
Conrad, Galsworthy, Hewlett and D. H. Lawrence.
You can find poetry in various scenes of the great body of prose
dramatists that have grown up in Europe since Ibsen, in Hauptmann, in
Synge, in Chekhov, in Jacinto Benavente, in dialogues where an idea is
fought for or an emotion displayed. It is manifestly absurd to crown
with the name of poetry every petty emotion or description by some
versifier, and deny it to the great dramatists who depict passions and
color great ideas with emotion. No one thought of denying the title of
poets to the dramatists when they formerly wrote in verse. Are you going
to deny it to them because they give us the same, if not a greater
effect in their prose than the old dramatist did in verse?
And I find much poetry, especially in letters, memoirs and biographies.
I find poems in biographies like Bisland's _Hearn_, Meynell's _Francis
Thompson_, Woodberry's _Poe_, Lawton's _Balzac_. I give these more or
less recent books as examples. The works are full of emotional passages
dealing with crucial events in the lives of the subjects. You will find
poetry in famous biographies like Moore's _Byron_, Dowden's _Shelley_,
Forster's _Dickens_, Cooke's _Ruskin_, Bielschowsky's _Goethe_, Froude's
_Carlyle_, etc., to name just the lives of some literary men.
It is particularly pleasing to find poetry in literary prose criticism.
For it was always held that criticism was but a secondary art, rarely
creative in the same sense as poetry, supposed to be a product of the
mind and not the soul, and merely a commentary on poetry. It is true,
formerly poets were often inclined to write their criticism in verse,
thinking that thus it became poetry. But it is only the ecstatic
presentation of critical ideas that makes criticism poetry, whether in
prose or verse. Poets have often described the mission of poetry in
verse, and given us genuine poems. Horace and Verlaine have done this.
But we have had great poetry in the critical work in prose of many
critics. You will find poetry in Carlyle, Ruskin, Goethe, Pater,
Brandes. You will find it in the prose essays of poets very often in
spite of the popular tradition that poets are not good prose writers.
I give two examples. The first is from Swinburne's book on Blake:
To him the veil of outer things seemed always to tremble with
some breath behind it; seemed at times to be rent in sunder
with clamour and sudden lightning. All the void of earth and
air seemed to quiver with the passage of sentient wings and
palpitate under the pressure of conscious feet. Flowers and
weeds, stars and stones, spoke with articulate lips and gazed
with living eyes. Hands were stretched towards him from beyond
the darkness of material nature, to tempt or to support, to
guide or to restrain. His hardest facts were the vaguest
allegories of other men. To him all symbolic things were
literal, all literal things symbolic. About his path and about
his bed, around his ears and under his eyes, an infinite play
of spiritual life seethed and swarmed or shone and sang.
Spirits imprisoned in the husk and shell of earth consoled or
menaced him. Every leaf bore a growth of angels; the pulse of
every minute sounded as the falling foot of God; under the
rank raiment of weeds, in the drifting down of thistles,
strange faces frowned and white hair fluttered; tempters and
allies, wraiths of the living and phantoms of the dead,
crowded and made populous the winds that blew about him, the
fields and hills over which he gazed.
The second is from James Thomson's essay on Shelley:
The only true or inspired poetry is always from within, not
from without. The experience contained in it has been
spiritually transmuted from lead into gold. It is severely
logical, the most trivial of its adornments being subservient
to, and suggested by, the dominant idea; any departure from
whose dictates would be the "falsifying of a revelation." It
is unadulterated with worldly wisdom, deference to prevailing
opinions, mere talent or cleverness. Its anguish is untainted
by the gall of bitterness, its joy is never selfish, its
grossness is never obscene. It perceives always the profound
identity underlying all surface differences. It is a living
organism, not a dead aggregate, and its music is the
expression of the law of its growth; so that it could no more
be set to a different melody than could a rose-tree be
consummated with lilies or violets. It is most philosophic
when most enthusiastic, the clearest light of its wisdom being
shed from the keenest fire of its love. It is a synthesis not
arithmetical, but algebraical; that is to say, its particular
subjects are universal symbols, its predicates, universal
laws: hence it is infinitely suggestive. It is ever-fresh
wonder at the infinite mystery, ever-young faith in the
eternal soul. Whatever be its mood, we feel that it is not
self-possessed but God-possessed; whether the God came down
serene and stately as Jove, when, a swan, he wooed Leda; or
with overwhelming might insupportably burning, as when he
consumed Semele.
Criticism deals with ideas that relate to life, and when written with
ecstasy on human topics and not on technique it is poetry. The passage
in Shelley's _Defense of Poetry_, beginning with the words "Poetry is
the record of the best and happiest moments, etc.," as well as the
conclusion of Poe's essay on _The Poetic Principle_ are poetry. The
critics here were poets in their prose criticism, no less than in their
rhymed lyrics.
As the reader will fathom by this time, my aim is to free poetry from
its bondage to requirements that were thought essential to it. I object
most emphatically to demands for rhyme, metre, rhythm, alliteration,
assonance, parallelism, repetition of word or phrase or line, tropes or
figures of speech, poetical diction, and any form of pattern. The poet
has the right to use any of the above instruments as he sees fit,
whenever he thinks they enhance the ecstasy in his work. But no critic
has a right to lay down a definition of poetry and insist that metre or
rhythm must be employed by a poet. Professor Mackail in his _Oxford
Lectures on Poetry_ defines poetry as patterned language, formally and
technically, adding that the technical essence of the pattern is the
repeat, and that when there is no repeat there is technically no poetry.
If this definition were true, then passages in the Bible full of poetry,
which use no parallelism, would not be poetry. The pattern does not make
the poem, it often ruins it. While it is true that when excited we
repeat expressions and become rhythmical, we do not do so with
regularity and uniformity. How puerile many poems by savages, and even
by the early civilized Babylonians and Egyptians, sound because the
first impediment of art, the repeat, is employed, and a phrase is
repeated _ad nauseam_ like the words of a child learning how to talk.
(!)
When we shake off our subservience to the pattern in poetry we shall
have little use for the numerous works on the art of writing poetry. We
shall find that many of the old books on poetry written with much
learning by scholars and poets, like Aristotle, Horace, Vida, Scaliger,
Vossius, Fabricius, Boileau, Pope, Opitz, Gottsched, Dante, are in part
obsolete. I do not mean that these worthy works have all to be thrown on
the scrap heap. But they laid down absurd rules as to how to write
poetry and how to determine it; they sought to confine it by rules
gleaned from older poets and insisted future poets obey these rules. Yet
great poets, who never even read them, disregarded all their rules and
created great poetry.
The chief thing that can be said for these critics is that they excel
the moderns in scholarship. These learned men represent an almost
extinct class, men who knew all the classics and all the books of
Europe. They make us regret that the day of the man of learning is
over, especially at a time when so many ignorant poets and critics and
reviewers discuss and decide emphatically on many matters wherein a
little learning is not a dangerous thing.
Wordsworth. "The atmosphere wherein all the arts exist is poetry."
Wilhelm A. Ambros: _The Boundaries of Music and Poetry_.
Wordsworth believed that the language used by people in poetry should be
that of the natural language of men under the influence of their
feelings and that the diction of metrical poetry should differ in no
wise from that of prose. Yet the only writers who use the natural
diction of men are novelists, prose dramatists and short story writers,
and, curiously enough, because they did not write verse, it has not
often been suspected that these men were poets. Wordsworth's views are
really proofs that poetry is found in prose, for the prose writers
comply with his requirements of using in their compositions the natural
conversation of men under the influence of natural feelings. They also
comply with Wordsworth's definition of poetry, recording "emotions
recollected in tranquillity."
Hazlitt has ably summed up the influence of the French Revolution on
Wordsworth. Our poet did away with mythological references, with tales
about legendary characters. He wrote about the emotions of the common
people and introduced no far-fetched metaphors, nor made pedantic
allusions.
Wordsworth, however, did not claim, as Coleridge thought he did, that
the language of verse poetry must be that of ignorant people. Wordsworth
never asserted that he wanted the poets to use the language of peasants,
except when peasants were portrayed and represented as speaking. He
simply protested against stilted, artificial language in verse poetry.
He held the use of such language in verse poetry to be ridiculous, as it
was in prose. He was not an exponent of prose poetry, even though he
laid little stress on the importance of metre. As the authors of the
article on Wordsworth in the _Encyclopedia Britannica_ state, the
farthest he went in defense of prose structure in poetry was to say that
if the words in verse happened to be in the order of prose, they were
not necessarily prosaic in the sense of unpoetic. He did not
(unfortunately) try to eliminate metre in poetry. He no doubt agreed
with Coleridge's own defense of meter in the _Biographia Literaria_. He
did not write against his own theory, for he always employed metre
and--except in some ballads--a diction that was even literary.
Though both Wordsworth and Coleridge were not overawed by the necessity
of metre in poetry, they believed in its use, and were opposed to prose
poetry. Coleridge, however, wrote a prose poem _The Wanderings of Cain_
and some of his essays are prose poetry. Coleridge also devoted an
entire chapter in his _Biographia Literaria_ to the defense of metre as
a vehicle for poetry. He attributes the origin of metre to the fact that
the mind makes a conscious effort to hold passion in check by fettering
it with regular numbers. On the contrary, this conscious check is due to
imitation of old examples, to fear in defying the critics, for the
natural language of passion is irregular rhythm, and it is impatient of
being confined in regular, artificial numbers. Coleridge thinks the
effect of metre is "to increase the vivacity and susceptibility both of
the general feelings and the attention" by the continued excitement of
surprise. I submit that metre often distracts the attention from the
poem's real object, which is to depict ecstasy. Metre often diverts our
ear to the singsong tone in which the emotions are couched. Instead of
adding to the vivacity and susceptibility of the feelings it really
makes us suspect that the poet is not sincere, for the man of emotions
expresses them spontaneously and does not trick them out in pattern.
Next, Coleridge assumes that because of custom, metre must have some
property in common with poetry. This argument cannot stand when we take
into consideration the innumerable emotional passages that have been
written in prose. A custom is only a passing practice, and free verse
writers have abandoned the custom of writing in metre and in many cases
have produced good poetry. Lastly, our critic thinks that every poet is
impelled "to seek unity by harmonious adjustment, and thus establishing
the principle, that all the parts of an organized whole must be
assimilated to the more important and essential parts." But why assume
that there is no unity of harmonious adjustment in an emotional passage
in prose? Or why identify such unity with a metrical pattern? Isn't a
Psalm in the Bible a unity of harmonious adjustment? Even if the
essential part of a poetic piece tends to assume a certain pattern it
does not mean that the whole piece should be given a patterned form.
Some day it will be recognized that a long composition recording
different emotions is really unaesthetic in a uniform pattern.
"As to the accents of words," says Bacon, in his _Advancement of
Learning_, Book VI, Ch. I, "there is no necessity for taking notice of
so trivial a thing; only it may be proper to intimate that these are
observed with great exactness, whilst the accents of sentences are
neglected; though it is nearly common to all mankind to sink the voice
at the end of a period, to raise it in interrogation, and the like."
This passage is the first attack in English on metre.
It was Whitman who gave the death blow to metre. He brought poetry back
to rhythmical prose, and is the greatest liberator poetry has ever had.
He demonstrated that an entire volume might be written in rhythmical
prose (with the lines broken up), and that the product could be the
highest poetry. His _Leaves of Grass_ ignored all the rules laid down in
various books on poetics. Whitman has done more than most critics to
convey to the world what poetry really is.
"In my opinion," says Whitman, "the time has arrived to essentially
break down the barriers of form between prose and poetry. I say the
latter is henceforth to win and maintain its character regardless of
rhyme, and the measurement-rules of iambic, spondee, dactyl, &c., and
that even if rhyme and those measurements continue to furnish the medium
for inferior writers and themes (especially for persiflage and the
comic, as there seems henceforward, to the perfect taste, something
inevitably comic in rhyme, merely in itself, and anyhow), the truest and
greatest _Poetry_ (while subtly and necessarily always rhythmic, and
distinguishable enough) can never again, in the English language, be
express'd in arbitrary and rhyming metre, any more than the greatest
eloquence, or the truest power and passion."
We have long been laboring under the mischievous Aristotelian division
of poetry into Epic, Dramatic and Lyric, and critics have exhausted
themselves trying to determine which of these was the highest form of
poetry.
As a matter of fact, the epic poem was only the primitive author's
method of writing a poetical novel centering around wars; or a later
poet's imitation of that form. The dramatic poem was another way of
telling a story without introducing much narration or description.
Poetry does not inhere in an epic of Homer or a play of Sophocles by
virtue of the form, but because of the emotions described, and similar
descriptions of emotions are to be found in our fiction and prose plays.
Again we have followed the ancients in subdividing lyric poetry into
elegy, pastoral, ode, satire, idyll. The moderns introduced the sonnet,
the ballade, the ballad and other forms. These divisions have perverted
our knowledge as to the nature of poetry. Any one can make a similar
classification of the poetry in prose, but it is useless to do so.
Poetry is recorded emotion and depicts various characteristics. The Song
of Deborah is a war song, a hymn and a satire, all in one.
Professor Posnett in his _Comparative Literature_ protested long before
Croce against these artificial divisions in poetry.
Poetry is the voice of excited man; it is as Baumgarten said--"perfect
sensitive speech," a definition that Croce regards as probably the best
ever given of poetry, while Saintsbury scoffs at it. It is immaterial
whether the rhythm is there or not. Prose is always poetry when it is
sensitized. Nietzsche, himself a great poet, also saw this. "Let it be
observed," said Nietzsche, "that the great masters of prose have almost
always been poets as well, whether openly, or only in secret and for the
closet; and in truth one only writes good prose _in view of poetry_." He
names Leopardi, Landor, Emerson and Merimee among the great prose
writers who were poets. We can add many other writers of essays,
dialogues, and criticisms to complement his list.
"The distinction between poetry and prose cannot be justified," said
Croce. "Poetry is the language of sentiment; prose of intellect; but
since the intellect is also sentiment, in its concretion and reality, so
all prose has a poetical side." "There exists poetry without prose, but
not prose without poetry." Poetical material permeates the souls of
all; any expression of it in verse or prose, in painting or music, is
poetry. Since all poetry is expression and all expression lyric, the
divisions of different kinds of poetry into epic, dramatic, etc., or
different divisions of one poem into scenes, books, chapters, acts,
stanzas, paragraphs, are of little importance, and are matters of
convenience.
Poetry is essentially lyrical. There is no such thing as dramatic or
epic poetry. All poetry is the emotional outcry of the poet or his
characters. We may have an emotion recorded in a separate poem called a
lyric, or in a speech in a composition divided into acts, following
certain rules and known as a drama. Similarly the speeches in epic poems
are lyrics. The poetry of Homer or Shakespeare is not epic or dramatic,
for poetry is just an emotional outburst. Andromache's speeches and
Hamlet's soliloquies could have appeared alone and they would have been
considered lyrics; they remain lyrics even in the body of a long
composition. The emotional passages in all prose works are also lyrical
poetry. There is really only one kind of poetry, lyrical poetry, for all
poems are emotional outbursts of an individual. Every imaginative
literary composition, whether in verse or prose, is made up of lyrical
poems, more or less.
One should no more look for a chapter on the drama in a book like this
dealing with poetry than for a treatise on the novel. A drama,
considered merely as a series of scenes bound together by a plot in a
fit manner to be presented on the stage to move people, and based on
rules that relate to economy of words, concentration of facts and
strikingness of action, is a performance that has a technique of its
own; the dramatist is a poet only by virtue of the ecstasy he puts in
the work. Considered in its primary significance as a performance where
action is the chief feature, the drama becomes poetry in those parts
where the action and emotion are concentrated.
It is, however, often difficult to extract scenes from the play, as they
lose in effectiveness by being thus separated. But the fact remains that
there is no such thing as dramatic poetry, for the essence of all poetry
is its lyricism. Dramatic scenes contain the lyric cries of the
_dramatis personae_. Action is but the emotional disturbances of the
characters and no longer merely means violent conduct, surprises,
battles, duels, suicides, murders. All great novels have dramatic scenes
and they are often as exuberant in poetry as are similar scenes in
plays. We no longer regard as tragedies only those plays in verse where
a virtuous person of high degree is in a frightful predicament because
of unjust and unlooked-for defeat with fate. No, in spite of Aristotle,
the suffering of even a wicked person of low station, depicted as due to
his own fault as of Hurstwood in _Sister Carrie_, and described in prose
narrative, is also tragedy. There is incidentally no such thing as a
comic dramatic poem, but a comic scene may be poetic if it moves to
ecstasy (not merely to farcic laughter), and if it is essentially
lyrical. Comedy also appears in works of fiction in prose, and may be
poetical. Moreover, most performances in prose dialogue or fiction
present an admixture of tragic and comic.
Tragedy often presents lyric poems greater than any other work of
literature; hence Aristotle and his imitators concluded that a verse
tragedy was the highest form of poetry. This is not so. If Shakespeare
and Sophocles lived in our day they might have written novels or essays,
and I daresay with their genius those novels or essays would have been
as good as their plays and would have contained as great poetry.
Our great poets do not owe their greatness to the use of the
stereotyped literary metrical forms. A man may have a great gift for the
use of these forms and not be a great poet, just as he may be a great
poet and fall flat when they encumber him. Ruskin and Dickens were great
poets, but when we say that their metrical compositions were not great
poetry we merely mean that they were not adept in choosing rhymes and
complying with metrical rules. To do this requires a distinct gift. An
amateur selects forced rhymes and has no ear. Swinburne, besides being a
great poet, had a distinct gift of creating melodious verse; but many
parodists have shown that they also had this gift without being able to
write poetry.
Mrs. Browning was a good poet both in verse and in prose. She wrote her
love poems in prose in her letters to her husband, and in verse in the
Portuguese sonnets which are nothing more than some of the letters put
into metre and rhyme; there are some who think that the letters are the
better poetry of the two. Her sentiments did not become poetry because
they were put in sonnet form.
The following letter is poetry:
I pour out my thoughts to you, dearest, dearest, as if it were
right rather to think of doing myself that good and relief,
than of you who have to read all. But you spoil me into an
excess of liberty by your tenderness. Best in the world!
Oh--you help me to live--I am better and lighter since I have
drawn near to you even on this paper--already I am better and
lighter. And now I am going to dream of you . . . to meet you
on some mystical landing place . . . in order to be quite well
to-morrow. Oh--we are so selfish on this earth, that nothing
grieves us very long, let it be ever so grievous, unless we
are touched in _ourselves_ . . . in the apple of our eye . . .
in the quick of our heart . . . in _what_ you are and _where_
you are . . . my own dearest beloved! So you need not be
afraid for _me_. We all look to our own, as I to _you_; the
thunderbolts may strike the tops of the cedars, and, except in
the first part, none of us be moved. True it is of me--not of
you perhaps, certainly you are better than I in all things.
Best in the world you are--no one is like you. Can you read
what I have written? Do not love me less! Do you think that I
cannot feel you love me, through all this distance? If you
loved me less, I should know, without a word or sign. Because
I live by your loving me! (June 24, 1846.)
It took the Greeks and Romans some time to learn that prose was the best
medium for philosophy and history. Plato had the good sense to write in
prose instead of following the ridiculous method of versifying of the
early Greek philosophers, like Parmenides and Empedocles.
In the first century A.D. various Roman historians wrote of historical
events in the form of epic poems. These are really histories with a
little occasional glimmer of poetry. Thus we had Silius's _Pontica_,
Valerius Flaccus's _Argonautica_, Statius's _Thebais_, and Lucan's
_Pharsalia_. The last two works were especially admired in the medieval
ages when rhymed or metrical historical chronicles were the fashion, and
they were favorites of Dante. Very few people to-day read these metrical
histories. English literature also is full of metrical and rhymed
histories, geographies, criticisms, scientific works, essays, etc. But
no one reads Warner's _Albion's England_, Drayton's _Poly Olbion_, or
Daniel's _First Four Books of the Civil War_. And Darwin's versified
_Botanical Garden_ has been a standing joke.
It is remarkable how past usages in literature influence us. The
examples of Lucretius versifying philosophy in his _Nature of Things_,
and that of Horace writing literary criticism in verse in his _Art of
Poetry_, have been fruitful of mischief. Even much of the lengthy works
of Shelley, Byron and Browning would have been better had they been
written in prose, and they would have lost none of their poetic
qualities. The greatness of the _Ring and the Book_, _Don Juan_ and the
_Revolt of Islam_ remains when these works are translated into the prose
of another language.
poetry, probably more than any other nation. The reason may be that they
have not been prolific of good poetry in verse, and have instead
reserved their poetry for prose, a more natural medium than Alexandrine
lines.
Fenelon was one of the first moderns who attacked verse. In two critical
works, _Dialogues on Eloquence_ and _Letters to the French Academy_
(there is an English translation of both, out of print), he emphasized
the insignificant part played by versification in poetry. He held that
there was no true eloquence without a due mixture of poetry, that poetry
was the very soul of eloquence. He said that there were many poets who
were poetical without making verses, and he considered versification
distinct from poetry. In his definition of poetry he excluded a
consideration of versification. He thought the perfection of French
verse impossible, that versification loses more than it gains by rhyme,
and that French poets were cramped by versification. He wanted
superfluous ornaments removed and the necessary parts turned into
natural ornaments. Still he did not insist on a complete abandonment of
rhyme, but wanted greater freedom. His biographer, St. Cyr, says that
Fenelon wanted to abolish verse altogether in French poetry. Fenelon
also wrote a novel in prose poetry in 1699, _Telemaque_. But prose
poetry existed in France before him, in old romances like the story of
_Aucassin and Nicolette_ and in Bossuet's funeral orations. His example
was followed by Sainte Pierre, in _Paul and Virginia_, by Prevost in
_Manon Lescaut_, by Rousseau and especially by Chateaubriand in _Atala_,
_The Genius of Christianity_ and _The Martyrs_. Unfortunately, Fenelon
insisted in introducing the cliches of verse into prose; artificial and
unnatural language hence ruined some of his work and assisted in
bringing the term prose poetry into contempt.
The French have always regarded the poet in a broader sense than have
the English. The article on poetry in the French Encyclopedia deals with
prose poems as well as with verse poems. Victor Hugo in his
_Shakespeare_, when he calls the lists of poets, mentions prose writers
like Diderot, Rousseau, Balzac, Chateaubriand, George Sand, Le Sage and
Cervantes. He who was himself a great poet knew that poetry did not
depend on metre.
Eugene Veron, the great French critic, author of a valuable work on
_AEsthetics_ (fortunately translated into English), also takes a broad
conception of the term poetry. He says that it would be absurd to deny
Moliere's _L'Avare_ is poetry because it is in prose, for poetical,
creative imagination and personal emotions are at work here. He states
that there was poetry in the story of Don Juan before Corneille put it
in verse. Versification, he urges, does not constitute poetry. He sees
that verse would not have improved such prose poems as _Paul and
Virginia_, _La Mare au Diable_, or _L'Oiseau_ (Michelet), and he places
in the front rank of poetry passages from Demosthenes, Cicero, Bossuet
(no doubt referring to some of the famous funeral orations) and
Mirabeau. He also says it is impossible to refuse to see poetic
character in the novel, for this deals with the creation of character
and the portrayal of passions.
I do not wish to go into the prose poetry written by other nations, for
every literature is full of it.
De Quincey having made a special plea for impassioned prose is looked
upon as the father of it, though there was prose poetry in English
literature from the earliest times; Malory, Sidney, Sir Thomas Browne,
Raleigh, Drummond, Milton, Bunyan, Taylor and Fuller were great prose
poets.
John Stuart Mill and Lord Beaconsfield both recognized the utterly
negligible role of metre in determining the nature of poetry. In an
early essay, originally published before he was thirty and collected
with another under the title _Poetry and Its Varieties_, Mill gives us
his definition of poetry. Guided by a statement of the author of the
_Corn Law Rhymes_, Ebenezer Elliot, that poetry is impassioned truth,
and by another definition from Blackwood's, that poetry is "man's
thought tinged by his feelings," he says, "Every truth which a human
being can enunciate, every thought, even every outward impression, which
can enter into his consciousness, may become poetry when shown through
any impassioned medium, when invested with the coloring of joy, or
grief, or pity, or affection, or admiration, or reverence, or awe, or
even hatred, or terror: and, unless so colored, nothing, be it as
interesting as it may, is poetry." There is nothing said in this
definition about rhythm or metre, and indeed Mill regarded as the
vulgarest of all any definition of poetry which confounds it with
metrical composition.
An idea emotionally treated becomes poetry whether in prose or verse,
whether rhythmical or not. Mill understood that, yet he erred when he
assigned a minor role to the emotions excited by the incidents in prose
fiction, though it is true that the emotions of excitement wakened by
the mere novel of adventure are indicative of a lower order of poetry.
It is to be regretted, however, that about five years later he somewhat
modified his main views.
Prose poetry was consciously written by Lord Beaconsfield, who tells us
in the early preface to his novel, _Alroy_, that he was trying to write
rhythmical prose poetry in that novel. He did not always succeed, but
throughout all his novels are found many excellent prose poems. He was
writing prose poetry in the early eighteen thirties before Baudelaire,
and in some of his tales, like _Pompanilla_, we have prose poems. He
often became bombastic, but he was a poet, nevertheless.
Later English critics have returned to the subject of prose poetry.
In his _Aspects of Poetry_ Professor John C. Shairp says that he grants
"that the old limits between prose and poetry tend to disappear." He
concludes his book with two chapters on prose poets, on Carlyle and
Newman. And Courthope, worshipper of metre that he is, concludes his
_History of English Poetry_ with a chapter on the poetry in the Waverly
Novels. We also recall that Bagehot could see little difference between
Tennyson's novels in verse and George Eliot's novels in prose.
A great critic like Pater maintained the rights of the poet in prose. In
his essay on Style he said "Prose will exert in due measure all the
varied charms of poetry down to the rhythm which, as in Cicero,
Michelet, or Newman, gives its musical value to every syllable."
The first lengthy and systematic plea for prose poetry I know of in
English, outside of Disraeli's and De Quincey's modest apologies for
writing in this manner, was made by David Masson in an essay on _Prose
and Verse: De Quincey_, published as a review of De Quincey in 1854. De
Quincey's preface, pleading for impassioned prose, suggested Masson's
essay. Masson had, however, dwelt on the poetic side of prose the year
before in an article on Dallas's _Poetics_, called _Theories of Poetry_.
Both of Masson's essays are to be found in his _Wordsworth, Shelley,
Keats and Other Essays_. Masson very ingeniously asks why we are not
allowed to write prose in the manner that Milton writes in verse, or in
the manner of AEschylus in prose translation. He concludes that poetry
and prose are not two entirely separate spheres, but intersecting and
penetrating. To-day we go even farther than Masson and urge that prose,
except in short lyrics when verse may be used, should be the sole
language of passion and the imagination. He vindicates De Quincey's
right to use impassioned prose; he quotes as an example of prose poetry
a beautiful passage from the conclusion of Milton's pamphlet, _Causes
That Have Hindered the Reformation in England_, and mentions especially
Jean Paul Richter, the prose poet who was responsible for the prose
poetry of two disciples, De Quincey and Carlyle. Richter's _Christ and
the Universe_ is highly regarded by him as prose poetry.
Masson's prediction that the time was coming when the best prose should
more resemble verse than it had done in the past, and that the best
verse should not disdain a certain resemblance to prose, is being
fulfilled. Remember Masson wrote before the _Leaves of Grass_ appeared,
and before the vogue of free verse.
Yet his viewpoint was severely criticized by a scholar like John Earle,
whose _English Prose_ contains an attack on prose poetry. Earle says
that prose poetry is found chiefly in ages of literary decadence like
the Latin Silver Age in writers from Tacitus to Boethius. On the
contrary, it is found as well in the golden ages of literature, as, for
example, in Sidney's _Arcadia_, which he himself quotes from, in Plato,
in Pascal, in Dante's prose. It is strange that this view of Earle's
should still largely prevail. Poetry and prose are still regarded by
academic scholars like Earle, Saintsbury, Courthope, Bosanquet
Watts-Dunton and Gummere as two distinct branches of literature. Earle
is right only when he objects to the cliches of verse in prose, but
to-day we object to all cliches.
Poetic prose, however, should not be used on every occasion, but only
when an ecstasy is to be expressed. And, above all, it should be
avoided--and this is how prose poetry got into disrepute--in expressing
sentimental emotions, commonplace ideas, and the merely popular. When we
read in eloquent prose, the grand eulogies on the flag, on the purity
and redeeming virtues of mother-love, on the dignity of toil, on the
glory of dying for one's country, on the goodness of God, etc., themes
which have been celebrated so often that they are nauseous to us because
nothing new is said, then we see how ridiculous prose poetry may become.
But as Pater says--impassioned prose has become the special and
opportune art of the modern world, and it can exert all the varied
charms of poetry down to the rhythm.
"The muse of prose-literature," says Masson, "has been hardly dealt
with. We see not why, in prose, there should not be much of that license
in the fantastic, that measured riot, the right of whimsy, that
unbalanced dalliance with the extreme and the beautiful, which the world
allows, by prescription, to verse. Why may not prose chase forest-nymphs
and see little green-eyed elves, and delight in peonies and musk-roses,
and invoke the stars, and roll mists about the hills, and watch the sea
thundering through caverns and dashing against the promontories? Why,
in prose, quail from the grand or ghastly in the one hand, or blush with
shame at too much of the exquisite on the other? Is Prose made of iron?
Must it never weep, never laugh, never linger to look at a butterfly,
never ride at a gallop over the downs?"
Yet George Moore, a great poet in prose himself, tells us in his
_Avowals_ that the greatness of English genius does not appear in its
prose, but in its poetry, i. e., in verse. The greatness of English
genius _is_ in its poetry, but in the poetry of its prose as well as in
the poetry of its verse. It appears in the ordinary dialect of its
novels and prose plays.
As a matter of fact, poetic prose has always been used. It is found in
the earliest as well as the later literature of every nation. The Bible,
Oriental Literature, the medieval romances, early Saxon prose are full
of it. It made a reappearance with renewed force in the romantic
movement that spread over England, Germany and France in the latter part
of the eighteenth and early part of the nineteenth centuries. In an age
like the romantic, when the right to live and express emotions was
pleaded, poetic prose, seeking restraint from metre, was especially
appropriate. George Brandes has studied this movement in his _Main
Currents_. Many of the leading writers of the romantic period used
impassioned prose. Saintsbury has found much poetry even in the prose of
John Wilson, who is not much read, one who was to some extent an enemy
of the romantic movement, and Saintsbury reprints in his _Specimens of
English Prose Style_, Wilson's _The Fairy's Funeral_.
America has contributed greatly to the development of prose poetry.
Hawthorne, Poe and Emerson were the first great masters in prose poetry
we have had, and I doubt if as poets they have been surpassed by any of
our metrical verse writers. One of the finest poems in American
literature is undoubtedly Hawthorne's reflections of his lonely life in
the Ivory Tower, when he revisited his old chamber in Salem where he
spent so many years. The famous passage from his diary, quoted in all
big biographies, is as great a poem, though in prose.
Emerson's essays are studied with prose poems. I shall mention only one,
the address to the poet, at the conclusion of the essay on "The Poet."
The Hawthorne passage is as follows:
Salem, Oct. 4th. Union Street (Family Mansion).--. . . . Here
I sit in my old accustomed chamber, where I used to sit in
days gone by. . . . Here I have written many tales,--many that
have been burned to ashes, many that doubtless deserved the
same fate. This claims to be called a haunted chamber, for
thousands upon thousands of visions have appeared to me in it;
and some few of them have become visible to the world. If ever
I should have a biographer, he ought to make great mention of
this chamber in my memoirs, because so much of my lonely youth
was wasted here, and here my mind and character were formed;
and here I have been glad and hopeful, and here I have been
despondent. And here I sat a long, long time, waiting patiently
for the world to know me, and sometimes wondering why it did
not know me sooner, or whether it would ever know me at
all,--at least, till I were in my grave. And sometimes it
seemed as if I were already in the grave, with only life
enough to be chilled and benumbed. But oftener I was happy,--at
least, as happy as I then knew how to be, or was aware of the
possibility of being. By and by, the world found me out in my
lonely chamber, and called me forth,--not, indeed, with a loud
roar of acclamation, but rather with a still, small voice,--and
forth I went, but found nothing in the world that I thought
preferable to my old solitude till now. . . . And now I begin
to understand why I was imprisoned so many years in this
lonely chamber, and why I could never break through the
viewless bolts and bars; for if I had sooner made my escape
into the world, I should have grown hard and rough, and been
covered with earthly dust, and my heart might have become
callous by rude encounters with the multitude. . . . But
living in solitude till the fulness of time was come, I still
kept the dew of my youth and the freshness of my heart. . . .
I used to think I could imagine all passions, all feelings,
and states of the heart and mind; but how little did I know!
. . . Indeed, we are but shadows; we are not endowed with
real life, and all that seems most real about us is but the
thinnest substance of a dream,--till the heart be touched.
That touch creates us,--then we begin to be,--thereby we are
beings of reality and inheritors of eternity. . . .
And the Emerson poem in prose is given herewith:
O poet! a new nobility is conferred in groves and pastures,
and not in castles or by the sword-blade any longer. The
conditions are hard, but equal. Thou shalt leave the world,
and know the muse only. Thou shalt not know any longer the
times, customs, graces, politics, or opinions of men, but
shalt take all from the muse. For the time of towns is tolled
from the world by funereal chimes, but in nature the universal
hours are counted by succeeding tribes of animals and plants,
and by growth of joy on joy. God wills also that thou abdicate
a manifold and duplex life, and that thou be content that
others speak for thee. Others shall be thy gentlemen, and
shall represent all courtesy and worldly life for thee; others
shall do the great and resounding actions also. Thou shalt lie
close hid with nature, and canst not be afforded to the
Capitol or the Exchange. The world is full of renunciations
and apprenticeships, and this is thine; thou must pass for a
fool and a churl for a long season. This is the screen and
sheath in which Pan has protected his well-beloved flower, and
thou shalt be known only to thine own, and they shall console
thee with tenderest love. And thou shalt not be able to
rehearse the names of thy friends in thy verse, for an old
shame before the holy ideal. And this is the reward; that the
ideal shall be real to thee, and the impressions of the actual
world shall fall like summer rain, copious, but not
troublesome to thy invulnerable essence. Thou shalt have the
sole land for thy park and manor, the sea for thy bath and
navigation, without tax and without envy; the woods and the
rivers thou shalt own, and thou shalt possess that wherein
others are only tenants and boarders. Thou true land-lord!
sea-lord! air-lord! Wherever snow falls or water flows or
birds fly, wherever day and night meet in twilight, wherever
the blue heaven is hung by clouds or sown with stars, wherever
are forms with transparent boundaries, wherever are outlets
into celestial space, wherever is danger, and awe, and
love,--there is Beauty, plenteous as rain, shed for thee, and
though thou shouldst walk the world over, thou shalt not be
able to find a condition inopportune or ignoble.
sympathetic introduction by William Dean Howells.
Essays by T. S. Eliot, Frederic Manning, Richard Aldington.
One of the frequent sayings in the text books of literary history is
that the literature of a nation always begins with poetry in verse, and
that good prose is a later development. England and Greece are
especially cited as examples, since Homer lived before Herodotus and the
author of _Beowulf_ before King Alfred.
Scholars follow one another often like sheep. When a man of prominence
utters an idea, it is taken up by a disciple and soon becomes a
convention. The academic critics and professors usually enshrine the
idea and it becomes a heresy to question it. The best illustration of
this is the almost universal adherence given to the idea that verse
poetry came before prose, a view first set forth by the geographer
Strabo in speaking of Homer in the beginning of his _Geography_. His
views were not entertained, I believe, by Plato or Aristotle. The
passage is worth quoting as I know of no other in literature that has
raised so much confusion and misapprehension as to the nature of poetry:
Prose discourse--I mean artistic prose--is, I may say, an
imitation of poetic discourse; for poetry as an art first came
upon the scene and was first to win approval. Then came
Cadmus, Pherecydes, Hecataeus and their followers, with prose
writing in which they imitated the poetic art, abandoning the
use of metre, but in other respects preserving the qualities
of poetry. Then subsequent writers took away, each in his
turn, something of these qualities, and brought prose down to
its present form, as from a sublime height. In the same way we
might say that comedy took its structure from tragedy, but
that it also has been degraded from the sublime height of
tragedy to its present "prose-like" style, as it is called.
_Geography_, 1. 2. 6.
Most critics have accepted this view. Scaliger, however, in the middle
of the sixteenth century repudiated it. He asked whether the first
so-called poems, the metrical records in temples, antedated everyday
speech.
Strabo was led to his error by the fact that the _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_
were among the very few survivals of the end of an epoch of verse
poetry, and also because some of the pre-Socratic philosophers like
Parmenides and Empedocles wrote in verse. Now scholars are all agreed
that the authors of the Homeric poems had many predecessors in the art
of composing poetry for many ages back down into legendary times. The
perfected poems in a pattern as regular as the dactylic hexameter were a
stage of evolution and did not spring up out of the darkness of an age
which had no literature. The Delphians claim that their first priestess
invented the dactylic hexameter; the Delians said that Olen, a mythical
singer from Asia Minor, first used it, but it was, of course, a
development. Prose was not a development from verse, as Strabo thought.
On the contrary, all verse, including Greek verse, was a development
from rhythmical prose. The stories about Troy were first told in prose;
next they were sung in ballads; then they were combined into epics.
Musaeus, one of the earliest legendary poets, antedating Homer, was said
to have composed prose.
As the earliest literatures of most nations have not been preserved to
us, we can examine various literatures in their earliest stages only; we
shall in almost every case find that these are written in rhythmical
prose or possess the beginning of a pattern hardly differing from
rhythmic prose. It is against all human experience to conclude that an
elaborate work of art following laws of measure could precede the
production in prose that represents the transcription of the natural
language of people which is in prose. We shall discover, however, that
in some cases, like the _Sagas_ of Iceland, we have in prose, the very
first poetical compositions, while other poetical compositions, like the
epics of Ireland, show us the prose along with the metrical development
in the body of the compositions.
First let us briefly note the characteristics of the poetry of natural
savages. This is always in rhythmical prose, or free verse, and this may
be seen in the anthology of Indian poems collected by Cronyn in _The
Path of the Rainbow_. The writer of the preface, Mary Austin, ventures
the opinion that the writers of free verse poems in America are merely
returning to the primitive form of poetry written by the native
Americans. Similarly the emotional outbursts of native African tribes
are in rhythmical prose. The only form of pattern in the poems of
savages as well as of people in an early stage of civilization is a
tendency to repeat the same phrase. But in their most emotional stories,
fables and legends, in their proverbs and crude moral and religious
philosophizing they use plain prose. This prose, especially that of the
legends, contains their first poetry, and of course there is no pattern
here. The pattern, assuming the form of irregular rhythm and repetition
of phrase, appears chiefly in hymns and chants, and these are only two
aspects of poetry.
The first change that occurs in a later stage of the hymn is that the
phrase or clause, instead of being repeated exactly, is varied by a
change of words, having a similar import. In short, we have the
beginning of parallelism. There is parallelism in the poems of all
early civilizations. It reaches its fullest development in an age of
civilization, as we observe in the poems of the Bible.
Probably the oldest poetry we have is that of the Egyptians and the
Babylonians, and there is no regular metre of any kind in these except
parallelism. The works are all irregularly rhythmical and in many cases
the lines are arranged like modern free verse, to call attention to this
irregular rhythm.
Dr. James H. Breasted, speaking of the Pyramid Texts, in his _Religion
and Thought in Ancient Egypt_, says: "Among the oldest literary
fragments in the collection are the religious hymns and these exhibit an
early poetic form, that of couplets displaying parallelism in
arrangement of word, and thought--the form which is familiar to all in
the Hebrew Psalms as 'parallelism of members.' It is carried back by its
employment in the Pyramid Texts in the fourth millennium B.C., by far
earlier than its appearance anywhere else. It is indeed the oldest of
all literary forms known to us. Its use is not confined to the hymns
mentioned, but appears also in other portions of the Pyramid Texts,
where it is, however, not usually so highly developed."
All the poems of the Egyptians were written simply in rough, irregular
lines of rhythmical prose. Read the famous _Song of the Harper_ where an
epicurean life is praised; it is impassioned rhythmical prose. Take up
the love poems, elegies, fairy tales and prayers of the ancient
Egyptians. They have no device of metre, rhythm or rhyme. The only
pattern is the parallelism. A few hymns are arranged in stanzas of ten
lines with a break in the middle of each line, but no definite metrical
laws existed for the lengths of lines or number of feet, so as to make a
uniform rhythmical pattern of the composition.
The Egyptians wrote much of their poetry in parallelistic prose. If we
do not know how they pronounced their vowels, we know enough of their
literature to see that regularity of accents and equal numbers of
syllables were not characteristic of their poetry.
The epic of _Gilgash_, the chief poem of the Babylonians, and the
various hymns translated by Professor Langdon, are all in irregular
rhythmical prose. These may be older than the poetry of the Egyptians,
but in form they are a great deal alike--simply prose with a rough
rhythm, frequent parallelism, but no uniform device. The lines are
arranged often like free verse. "It is difficult to draw the line
between their poetry and the higher style of prose," says Francis
the poetic movement, much greater than in the Hebrew Psalms. Metre is
felt and observed at times, but then abandoned--the thought carrying
itself along beyond the strict boundaries of metrical division."
We have seen that critics find in the hymns of the Egyptians and
Babylonians the irregular rhythm and parallelisms of the Psalms, in
short, impassioned rhythmical prose.
Let us now examine the form of the poetry of the Bible.
W. Robertson Smith in an able article, "The Poetry of the Old
Testament," posthumously collected in _Lectures and Essays_, showed that
Hebrew poetry was rhythmic without possessing laws of metre, for the
rhythm of thought created a naturally rhythmic prose. Rhythm is the
measured rise and fall of feeling and utterance, to which the rhythm of
sound is subordinate. Prosodic rules are not necessary, "for the words
employed naturally group themselves in balanced members, in which the
undulations of the thought are represented to the ear." When poetry
becomes more artificial people do not trust to the rhythm of thought but
attribute importance to metre and finally "we are apt to forget its
essential subordination to rhythmic flow of thought."
There has been no more amusing game than the ever-renewed attempt to
find metres in the Bible. One of the most ridiculous claims, at one time
widely in vogue, was that the Greek metres were to be found in the
Bible. Vossius and the younger Scaliger denounced these views, first
advanced by Josephus and Philo.
We are beginning to see to-day that the chief characteristic of the form
of the poetry in the Bible is parallelism in irregular rhythm.
Dr. Koenig and other scholars agree that it is this irregular rhythm
based on accent of syllable that distinguishes Hebrew poetry. Each line
had a number of accented syllables ranging from two to five, but the
lines did not regularly or alternately have the same number of accented
syllables. The unaccented syllables were also not counted. The poem
became nothing more than rhythmical prose. Sir George A. Smith says, in
his _The Early Poetry of Israel_, that the Hebrew poets indulged
deliberately in the metrical irregularities of verse. They deviated more
than Shakespeare, who did not always confine himself to the iambic foot
and pentameter line in his blank verse. "In every form of Oriental art
we trace the influence of what may be called Symmetrophobia, an
instinctive aversion to absolute symmetry, which if it knows no better,
will express itself in arbitrary and even violent disturbances of the
style or pattern of the work." The more correct view, however, is that
this symmetry was never intended by the Hebrew poets; that the
irregular arrangement of accents with occasional symmetry was the rule.
Both Smith and Koenig cite G. Dalman, who says that this irregular rhythm
is found in the songs of Arabia to-day sung in Palestine. These songs
are made up of lines of from two to five syllables, of which one to four
are unaccented, the poet being bound by no definite numbers. This is the
irregular rhythm of Hebrew poetry, and also, by the way, of the
_Nibelungen Lied_. It is the rhythm of all early poetry, the Egyptian
and Babylonian.
But even those who have given up the hope of finding metres in Hebrew
poetry insist that a regular metrical form was used for the Kinoth or
lamentations. Professor Budde held that the Kinoth had a regular metre.
But the discovery merely amounted to this: that a long line was followed
regularly by a short line. There was no uniformity of accented syllables
in successive or alternate lines. There are two, three and four
syllables in them almost at the will of the poet.
We may then conclude that rhythm is never regular in the poetry of the
Bible.
All ancient Hebrew poetry was in rhythmical prose; prophecies, elegies,
songs, hymns, parables, and dialogues. The irregular rhythmical form was
a natural outflow of the ecstatic element.
But what about the parallelism? Does this make the Bible verse? Bishop
Lowth, in his _Lectures on the Sacred Poetry of the Hebrews_, delivered
at Oxford in the middle of the eighteenth century, no doubt performed
great service in calling attention to the parallelisms of Hebrew poetry.
The importance of these in ancient Hebrew poetry has, however, been
overestimated. Parallelism did not create poetry, but was often its
garment. There are passages employing parallelisms that are not poetry,
while many poems exist in which these are not used. Dr. Edward Koenig, in
his article on Hebrew Poetry in the _Jewish Encyclopedia_, concludes
that the poets of the Bible were not bound by parallelism, often setting
it aside and not using it.
In his account of _The Literary Study of the Bible_, Professor Richard
G. Moulton has given an excellent study of the parallelism of the Bible,
but he admits that parallelisms of clause are also prose devices. If
parallelism, then, is also a property of prose, we cannot say that
parallelism alone is sufficient to distinguish poetry from prose, or
even Hebrew poetry from Hebrew prose. Moulton finds that prose and
poetry overlap each other in the Bible. All this merely proves that
parallelisms were no doubt anciently used to differentiate prose
literature conveying emotions from prose literature barren of feeling.
But parallelism was not indispensable to the literature of ecstasy.
Yet we cannot deny the fact that parallelisms occur in the Bible with
such frequency as almost to have become a pattern of Hebrew poetry.
Bishop Lowth thought the origin of the parallelism was due to the system
of chanting hymns where there was a response by the congregation, and
that the practice of the parallelism soon extended to all poetry. But,
for example, proverbs from their very epigrammatic nature tend towards
parallelism. The origin was most likely due to the variations of phrase
introduced by individuals who tired of the incessant, silly repetition
of similar words such as are indulged in by savages.
There is parallelism in all poetry, in _Beowulf_ and the _Kalevala_, and
even in prose. For it must be admitted that under emotion a man tends to
repeat an idea, in the same or in a synonymous language.
There can be no doubt that parallelism was consciously and deliberately
indulged in by the Hebrew poets, but it is as absurd to confuse it with
Hebrew poetry as to confuse metre with English poetry. There are
poetical passages in the Bible containing no parallelisms. It should
also be borne in mind that parallelism developed as a perfect pattern
when poetry was at a high stage. Like all patterns it was a product of a
type of civilization. No rude state of society can develop a pattern,
which is the result of evolution.
Parallelism is not used frequently to-day as a pattern of verse, though
it can be found in all modern literature. Yet it is a more natural means
of expressing one's emotions than rhyme or metre.
The only pattern of importance, then, that appears extensively in the
Bible is that of parallelism. There is no pattern of rhythm at all, for
this is free. The result is that the poetry of the Bible is in what may
be called prose, for the repetition of the idea and language in the
parallelism is natural even in prose. Parallelism in the Bible did not
create a distinct branch of literature called verse, as metre did. Those
Psalms that have parallelism are very little different from those Psalms
where it is absent. They are both really prose.
It was unfortunate that Hebrew poetry later eschewed the rhythmic prose
used in the Bible and adopted first rhymed prose and then rhymed metre.
There were several circumstances that led to this.
It has been usually recognized that rhymed prose was first used among
the Hebrews in the Liturgy by Jannai, who flourished in the seventh
century. Metre was introduced in the tenth century by Dunash ben Labrat.
Both these poets followed Arabic models. Saadyah, the Hebrew
philosopher, blamed Dunash for having ruined the beauty and naturalness
of the Hebrew language for poetry. Even Jehudah HaLevi, the great
national poet who used Arabic meters, regretted, in his philosophical
prevail among the Hebrew poets.
The oldest Arab poetry was also in prose. The earliest pattern for
poetry among the Arabians was the Saj (cooing), or rhymed but unmetrical
prose. Goldziher calls the Saj the oldest form of poetic speech; it
continued to exist even after the regular metres were established, the
Koran, for instance, being in Saj. At first it was unrhymed, as
Goldziher says; the earliest Arabic poetry was in unmetrical prose.
From Saj arose Rajaz (trembling), which is partly metrical, and forms
the transition to the artificial Arabic meters.
The earliest surviving Arabic poetry, the seven poems of the
_Muallaqat_, composed before Mohammed, are so perfect in form that all
Arabic scholars assume they were produced after a long period extending
through many years of poetic practice. They were not rude products, but
had an historical background, as did the _Iliad_. They are written in
perfected and complicated metres, but the Saj is older than these.
We have two other proofs that poetry was in early times written in
rhythmical prose, or at least in a rhythm that makes only a slight
approach to metre. These are to be found in two of the oldest Aryan
literary monuments extant, the _Rigveda_ of India and the _Avesta_ of
Iran.
Two-fifths of the hymns of the _Rigveda_ are composed in a metre called
trishtubh, the most frequent measure in the _Veda_. It is made up of
stanzas of four lines, each of eleven syllables, the last four of which
only have to follow a pattern, this consisting of two iambuses or an
iambus and a spondee. This requirement left a good deal of liberty to
the poet. Here is an example of it, in the _Hymn to Dawn_, in
MacDonnels' _Sanskrit Literature_ (P. 83):
Arise! the breath, the life again has reached us:
Darkness has gone away and light is coming.
She leaves a pathway for the sun to travel:
We have arrived where men prolong existence.
Max Mueller in his translation in prose has adhered in many cases to the
original metre, and the reader feels he is reading prose. The Hindus,
like the free verse writers, merely arranged their lines to call
attention to the rhythm, but it was really prose employing metrical
rules only at the end of the line. It has none of the hampering
qualities of classic or English metres, or of the metres in the later
Indian epics when the quantity of every syllable was determined.
The _Rigvedas_ are fixed by some scholars at 1500 B.C.
When we come to the _Avesta_ of the Iranians who left India and wrote
their work in a language that is almost Sanskrit, we find more liberty
as regards the metres. The _Gathas_, which are said to be the oldest
portions of the work, the work of Zoroaster himself, have the same or
nearly the same kind of metre as the Vedic hymns, but there is greater
liberty. The syllables need not be of a uniform quantity at the end of
the line, but each line, as in the _Rigvedas_, also has the same number
of syllables. The third of the five _Gathas_ uses the trishtubh or most
frequent metre of the _Veda_, four lines of eleven syllables, but
without restrictions as to quantity of final vowels.
Of course the reader can see that such verse is really prose, for there
are no limitations as to when accent or quantity should uniformly be
used. L. H. Mills in his translation of the _Gathas_ keeps close, as he
tells us, to the original metres. He wisely breaks up the metrical line,
based merely on the counting of syllables, and the result reads like
prose, which it really is in the original.
A study of the five "metres" of the five _Gathas_ appears in Martin
Haug's _Essays in the Sacred Language, Writings and Religion of the
Parsis_.
The _Gathas_ were written about the fourteenth century B.C. by Zoroaster
and hence are not much later than the _Rigvedas_.
In the _Rigvedas_ and _Gathas_ we have the first stage of metre used by
Aryan nations; these are the basis of all later metres. They were
written, it must be recalled, not in ages of barbarism, and represent
the transition from prose to regular metre. They are so near prose that
only an arrangement into lines makes us call them metrical. After all,
they do not differ much from the rhythmical prose in which the poetry of
Ancient Egyptians, Babylonians and Hebrews was written. We see thus that
rhythmical prose was the first language wherein poetry was written, and
that hampering metre is always late in the literary development of a
nation. We learn how great is the delusion of literary historians that
metrical poetry is the first literature of all nations and that prose is
a later growth.
The earliest poetry of a country is expressed first in prose by word of
mouth. It is then put down first in writing in prose, and later versions
sometimes change the prose into meter. Often the earlier prose version
is lost and it is then concluded that a literature of a nation begins in
verse.
Let us examine the form of the earliest Irish literature. The oldest
stories in Irish literature center around the exploits of Cuchulinn, who
is reputed to have died at the beginning of the Christian era. This
means that the tale about him was told by word of mouth up till the time
they were written down in the seventh or eighth century. The versions of
a few centuries later are the copies we now have in the epic _Tain Bo
Cualnge_. According to Edmund C. Quiggin's article on Irish Literature
in the _Britannica_, the original Tain consisted of prose interspersed
with rhythmical prose called rhetoric. Later metrical poems were largely
substituted for the rhetoric. As Mr. Quiggin says, the Tain is of
interest as showing the preliminary stage through which the epics of all
other nations had gone. No doubt even the _Iliad_ was originally told in
prose (and probably written in prose) while the verse versions are the
latest we have of the story.
Eleanor Hull, in _A Text Book of Irish Literature_, also says in Vol. 1,
p. 95, that there are few verse poems in the earlier _Tain Bo Cualnge_,
most of the poetry being usually in declamatory prose style known as
rosg, while in the later version long verse poems are frequent.
The earliest Teutonic verse was rather rhythmical prose, with some
alliteration. It is often hard to distinguish Anglo-Saxon prose from
Anglo-Saxon verse. AElfric, who is regarded by many as one of the fathers
of English prose, wrote his _Lives of the Saints_ in rhythmical prose,
arranged in irregular lines just like our modern free verse. The reader
may consult Professor Skeat's edition. This arrangement, needless to
say, did not make poetry of it. But free verse, as we see, was written
in England in 1000 A.D.
Dr. Edwin Guest, in his _History of English Rhythms_, says that the
Anglo-Saxon writers sometimes gave a very definite rhythm to their
prose, and he cites a few passages characterizing King William, from the
Chronicle attributed to Wulfstan in the latter part of the eleventh
century. Dr. Guest adds that in his opinion this rhythmical prose was
one of the instruments in breaking up the alliterative system of the
Anglo-Saxons. The passage he cites, however, is no more rhythmical than
many passages in modern English prose. Anglo-Saxon prose, then, often
was rhythmical, and even arranged like free verse, but it became
genuine poetry only when the element of ecstasy was present. Even the
middle-English impassioned alliterative prose poem, _The Wooing of Our
Lord_, of the thirteenth century, does not differ much from Anglo-Saxon
verse.
The earliest Teutonic poetry was emotional prose, and only later did
definite rules bind it. The author of _Beowulf_, though the first
English verse poet, is not the oldest Teutonic poet; he had predecessors
in rhythmic prose. "When we consider primitive Teutonic verse closely,"
says Gosse in his article in the _Britannica_ on Verse, "we see that it
did not begin with any conscious art, but as Vigfussen had said, 'was
simply excited and emphatic prose' uttered with the repetition of catch
words and letters. The use of these was presently regulated." English
poetry, then, began in the use of excited and emphatic prose. One of the
best pieces of Anglo-Saxon prose poetry is the _Sermon to the English_
on the ravages of the Dane by Archbishop Wulfstan of York in the early
part of the eleventh century. It reads like Anglo-Saxon verse. One sees
the unconscious influence of Anglo-Saxon prose poetry as late as
Drummond's _The Cypress Grove_ (1623), an ecstatic prose poem against
death.
The fact that the _Sagas_, the earliest literature of Iceland, were
written in perfect prose has puzzled those who claim that the early
literature of all nations is verse poetry, and that prose is a later
development. The events which the _Sagas_ celebrate took place in the
tenth century, and the following century was the period of their
narration. They were written down in the present form chiefly in the
thirteenth century. Ari Frodi (1067-1148) is considered by many the
first inventor of classic Norse prose. The most famous of the _Greater
Sagas_ is the _Njala_ written about the middle of the thirteenth century
and celebrating events of the beginning of the eleventh century.
Earlier Icelandic verse poetry did exist, but it does not belong to
Iceland proper. The great strength of real Iceland poetry was in the
_Sagas_, which Morris calls "unversified poetry." Some of these existed
as early as the first part of the tenth century. It seems anomalous to
the literary historian that a nation should at the very beginning of its
literary history have developed prose before verse, that it should have
celebrated its heroes in prose instead of verse song. All stories among
ancient people were, however, originally told in prose; the first
expression was always in rhythmical poetical prose.
It is not true, then, that verse is the first form in which a nation's
poetry is written, or that prose developed from verse. Prose was the
original language of poetry, and to prose it should return. The pattern
was a gradual development.
The unrhymed iambic pentameter known as blank verse is really a form of
free verse; it is a modified form of the unrhymed classical measure. It
made its appearance in Italy in the early part of the sixteenth century,
and was used by Ariosto in his comedies, except that he employed a final
additional unaccented syllable, making eleven syllables in each line.
Surrey, who used it in his translation of two books of the _AEneid_,
imported it from the Italians. It was called by the Italians _versi
sciolti_, "untied or free verse." It was, then, the old classical
measure with more freedom.
In his essay, _Blank Verse_, John Addington Symonds dwells especially on
the plasticity and variety of blank verse, which he says it has more
than any other national metre. It may be used for the commonplace and
the sublime, the tragic and the comic, etc. It does not have to consist
of five iambuses only, but other feet may be substituted almost at the
caprice of the poet. This, however, practically amounts to saying that
blank verse is after all a great deal like prose; indeed, it may be
arranged like modern free verse with great ease. Its plasticity and
variety are due to the fact that its artificial requirements are less
than those of most other metres. It was a fortunate day for English
drama and poetry when Marlowe, Shakespeare and Milton, following in the
footsteps of Surrey's translation of two books of the _AEneid_, and
Sackville's and Norton's play, _Gorboduc_, made blank verse fashionable.
The writers really brought poetry back into prose. For blank verse is
but a restricted prose, because there is as often as not no natural
pause at the end of the line, and because other feet may be substituted
for the iambus.
One of the reasons why English verse poetry excels French is because
blank verse, a more natural medium than the rhymed Alexandrines, became
the chief vehicle for poetry.
In fact, the blank verse of the later Elizabethan dramatists is really
prose, for it is less rhythmical than that of Shakespeare. Blank verse
was said to have degenerated with them. It is also said to be prosaic as
used by Wordsworth. These poets, however, are merely less rhythmical
than the alleged masters of blank verse. All blank verse is as near
prose as any metrical medium that has been hitherto introduced. Bernard
Shaw said he found it easier than prose. It appears very often in prose
without the writer being aware of it. Dickens had a tendency, as also
did Ruskin, to drop unconsciously into blank verse in his prose.
The great English blank verse poets and nearly all the poets of England
in the nineteenth century used this medium, and are really our supreme
prose poets.
The experiment of arranging blank verse in the form of prose and of
putting prose in the metre of blank verse has been often tried with
success. I have no intention of using this means of showing that blank
verse is really a more modulated prose. Any passage of blank verse can
naturally also be put into modern free verse, into the free rhythms of
Whitman, for example.
The lovers of blank verse imagine, however, that its beauty is partly
derived from the existence of a pause at the end of the fifth foot and
because the next line begins with a capital letter. As a matter of fact,
there is no particular virtue in having that pause, and the next line
need not begin with a capital letter, and should be continued as of the
same line. For the real pauses are, after all, not in these artificial
places but where our natural speech and punctuation marks dictate them.
The virtues of blank verse are the virtues of rhythmic prose, which is
still freer and more natural than blank verse, just as blank verse is
preferable to the heroic couplet.
Our English poets who write in blank verse would have done even better
to use prose, rhythmical or unrhythmical. To us moderns there is
something of a distortion in chopping up good prose into lines of five
feet, each beginning with a capital letter. The more beautiful and
natural medium is prose, for blank verse is but a confined prose. It is
not fair or right to make characters speak in this fettered prose. It is
absurd to state that their speeches become poetry only because of this
fettered prose. Every great passage in Shakespeare in blank verse would
have continued to be poetry in regular prose. We observe that the great
prose passages of Shakespeare are poetry even though not in blank verse.
English poetry should free itself from the bondage of blank verse, and
use prose. However, next to free verse blank verse is the best medium
that English poetry has yet found.
Blank verse was in disfavor in the eighteenth century and was regarded
as prose. We may smile at Samuel Johnson's remark upon it in his _Life
of Roscommon_, but on reflection we find that he was, after all, right.
"Blank verse, left merely to its numbers, has little operation either on
ear or mind; it can hardly support itself without bold figures and
striking images. A poem frigidly didactic, without rhyme, is so near
prose that the reader only scorns it for pretending to be verse." He
argues, either write prose or rhyme, but choose no intermediate measure.
The free verse of modern times, the revival of which is due to Walt
Whitman, is really the oldest form in which poetry was expressed. It
existed along with parallelism among the Egyptians, Babylonians, and
Hebrews, among the Hindoos and the Anglo-Saxons. It is rhythmical prose,
arranged so as to call attention to the rhythm. It is not a third medium
for expression, next to prose and the regular verse-forms. The lines do
not return upon themselves, that is, there is no repeat any more than in
rhythmical prose.
In its present form in English it dates from Aelfric's _Lives of the
Saints_, about 1000 A.D.
Free verse has come to stay, and numbers many able poets among its
devotees. It is more natural than rhymed or metrical verse, which,
however, it will not wholly displace. The manuscripts of many poets who
used conventional metres show that the original form of composition was
free verse. The detractors of free verse need not think they bring a
valid argument against it when they arrange free verse in prose form,
and, vice versa, chop up prose sentences into brief lines beginning with
a capital, and ask what is the difference between the two. It is
admitted there is none. It matters not if the poet wishes to arrange his
composition in free verse forms to call attention to the rhythm, or to
print it as prose. It is immaterial if you call _vers libre_ rhythmical
prose or a distinct verse form. The poetry is independent of any
ordering of the lines. Neither of the resulting products loses or gains
in poetical attributes by the objector's turning prose into free verse,
or free verse into prose. The question is, how much ecstasy or emotion,
what impassioned ideas there are in the work.
Free verse may or may not have a cadence all its own, but one feels that
those who advocate free verse need not try to prove that it does and
must possess a cadence peculiar to itself. Free verse may have great
poetic value even though it lacks a unique cadence. Free verse rose into
prominence lately because poets wanted to be freed from the bonds of
metre. They should not encumber themselves with the shackles of a new
prosody.
Let us illustrate our point: we shall take a few lines from a great
prose poem by Lafcadio Hearn and arrange them in free verse. It is from
the essay called "The Eternal Haunter" in the volume _Exotics and
Retrospectives_. The haunter is evidently ancestral memory or the spirit
of life in the past.
Ancient her beauty
As the heart of man,
Yet ever waxing fairer,
Forever remaining young.
Mortals wither in time
As leaves in the frost of autumn;
But time only brightens the glow
And the bloom of her endless youth.
All men have loved her
But none shall touch with his lips
Even the hem of her garment.
It is seen that this prose passage in the free verse transformance has
the cadences which were present before. It is still poetical, as it was
in the original version as well. It really matters little if Hearn had
written it as it now stands. It is a question of personal preference
with the poet, in what form he wishes to write.
Walter P. Eaton, in an article in the _Atlantic Monthly_ for October,
passage from Pater's _Renaissance_ and arranged it in free verse form,
and then a passage from Sandburg's free verse and arranged it in prose,
and tried unsuccessfully to show that the Pater passage did not become
free verse, and that the Sandburg passage did not become good prose.
His mistake was in trying to take a passage from Sandburg that had a
patterned form, and in arranging the Pater passage into lines that were
too brief. But Professor Lowes has taken passages from Pater, Hewlett,
Fiona Macleod, Conrad and George Meredith and printed them as free
verse, and they truly read like free verse poems.
The votaries of free verse demand a special cadence, but there is hardly
any of it in Masters's poems in the _Spoon River Anthology_ which could
have been printed as prose passages. They would have been just as good
and poetical as they are in free verse, but Masters has the right to
make any arrangement he wanted. Ecstasy is more important than cadence,
and he has ecstasy.
The following passage from Roosevelt's essay on _History as Literature_
is poetry by virtue of its ecstasy and visualizing effect, though
printed in prose form. Roosevelt might have arranged it in the long
lines of irregular lengths like those of Whitman into which it fits
better than it would into lines of brief, irregular length. But its
poetry does not depend upon the rhythms which are in the original prose.
It is only one of the few cases where Roosevelt succeeds in being a
poet, for he was rather the orator who swayed by rhetoric many of the
worst of popular prejudices.
The true historian will bring the past before our eyes as if it
were the present . . .
Gorgeous in our sight will rise the splendor of dead cities,
And the might of the elder empires of which the very ruins crumbled
to dust ages ago;
Along ancient trade-routes, across the world's waste spaces, its
caravans shall move;
And the admirals of uncharted seas shall furrow the ocean with
their lonely prows,
Beyond the dim centuries we shall see the banners float above armed
hosts.
We shall see conquerors riding forward to victories that have
changed the course of time.
We shall listen to prophecies of forgotten seers.
Ours shall be the dreams of dreamers who dreamed greatly,
Who saw in their vision peaks so lofty
That never have they been reached
By the sons and daughters of men.
Dead poets shall sing to us the deeds of men of might
And the love and the beauty of women.
Dr. Andrews in his _Writing and Reading of Verse_ has also given us
illustrations of rhythmic prose that he has resolved into free verse.
Like Professor Patterson, he rightly refuses to recognize free verse as
a distinct species of verse, holding it to have an affinity at least to
defined special laws of free verse. He also recommends the would-be
practitioners of free verse to study the prose rhythms of men like Pater
and De Quincey.
Professor Corson, the Browning scholar, wrote to Walt Whitman that be
believed that impassioned prose would be the medium in which the poetry
of the future would be written, and that he considered the _Leaves of
Grass_ one of the harbingers. The vogue of free verse, which is but
impassioned prose, shows that his prophecy is coming true. In England
Matthew Arnold and Walter Henley used it. Edward Carpenter had been
writing it as a result of Whitman's influence, in _Towards Democracy_ in
started, had been writing in his _The Conservator_ free verse poems. No
one paid attention to these even when some of them were collected in
_Optimos_ in 1910, except a few disciples. Richard Hovey, Ernest Crosby,
and Stephen Crane had also been writing free verse after Whitman before
the year 1900. About 1912 an impetus was given to free verse by the
poets of the new poetic era which set in and which Untermeyer calls the
_New Era in American Poetry_. Most of the contemporary free verse poets
began writing simultaneously.
Nearly all of our modern free verse poets are admittedly indebted to
Whitman; Louis Untermeyer names Whitman as the leading influence on
modern American poetry. Let us also be thankful that Whitman did not
write about the "technique of free verse," about "cadence," "strophe"
and "return."
Whitman is without a doubt the father of free verse in America and
England to-day. He did not claim to have originated it, since he found a
form of it in the prose poetry of the Bible and Ossian. It was also used
by Milton and Blake and in German by Goethe and Heine. As Bliss Perry
also shows, _The Lily and the Bee_ by Warren, the author of _Ten
Thousand a Year_, was written in free verse, before Whitman. Tupper also
used it. Free verse was adopted in France and Belgium as a result of
Whitman's influence. America owes nothing to French free verse which was
usually rhymed and corresponds to the Pindaric Ode founded by Cowley in
Dionysius of Halicarnassus was one of the few ancient critics who
brought the boundaries of prose and poetry close. His work _On Literary
Composition_ contains two chapters on the importance of rhythm, which he
considers an important element in prose as well as in verse, and he is
especially impressed by the rhythms of Thucydides, Plato and
Demosthenes. At the conclusion of this work, which has been translated
by W. Rhys Roberts, are two chapters entitled "How Prose Can Resemble
Verse," and "How Verse Can Resemble Prose." He wants prose not to be
cast in metre or rhythm but simply to appear rhythmical and metrical;
the metres and rhythms must be unobstrusively introduced. In this he
follows Aristotle's _Rhetoric_ which says prose should have rhythm but
of not too marked a character. Dionysius especially shows Demosthenes's
great care in the matter of rhythm, and instances as examples of
artistic finish among the Greeks the fact that Isocrates worked ten
years on his _Panegyrics_. After having shown how prose may resemble
verse he points out how verse resembles prose. When the clauses and
sense do not coincide with the metrical line but are carried over for
completion in another line, the result is prosaic. That is what makes
our English blank verse so much like prose.
Dionysius erred however in not emphasizing the importance of the
ecstatic element in making prose and verse resemble each other. He
over-valued the use of rhythm in prose, but he was after all swayed by
the ecstasy of the writer. He tells of the influence upon him of reading
one of Demosthenes's speeches. If Sidney said that he could not take up
the ballad of Percy and Douglas without feeling his heart moved as by a
trumpet, Dionysius says even more beautifully, "When I take up one of
his speeches, I am entranced and am carried hither and thither, stirred
now by one emotion, now by another. I feel distrust, anxiety, fear,
disdain, hatred, pity, good-will, anger, jealousy. I am agitated by
every passion in turn that can sway the human heart, and am like those
who are being initiated into wild mystic rites."
However, regularity of feet or metre in prose carried on to a great
extent makes the prose artificial. The Romans occasionally indulged in
it, but they generally used rhythmical prose, as the reader of Cicero
and Livy will observe. Quintilian, who recognized that prose has often
metrical feet that read like verse, thought it ugly and inelegant that
an entire verse should appear in a prose composition. He says that he
does not entertain "the idea that prose, which ought to have sweeping
and fluent motion, should dawdle itself into dotage in measuring feet
and weighing syllables. For this would be the part of a wretched
creature, occupied on the infinitely little. Nor could one who exhausted
himself in this care, have time for better things."
Probably we need not better reply than this to the high claims made for
the French form known as polyphonic verse. Prose that is interspersed
with metrical patterns is not natural.
The truth of the matter is that all the metrical features that are
demanded of poetry belong to the ornamental requirements like metaphors,
myths, rhetorical flourishes and all other gewgaws. There are always
stages in civilization when man wants adornment for his speech.
Something of that mental state exists in us to-day. We bedeck and
bedrape our poetry with trappings without which it is better off.
Artificialities appear even in comparatively modern prose. The prose of
Milton is full of rhetoric and the great Burke had rhetorical
characteristics that we call Asiatic. We are familiar with the
euphuistic qualities of the Elizabethan prose, especially pervading John
Lyly's novel _Euphues_ and Sidney's _Arcadia_.
In an excellent essay Plutarch shows that he understood that verse was
largely natural to man in a certain stage of civilization, because all
ornament was natural to him. In his essay on "Wherefore the Pythian
Priestess now Ceases to Deliver Her Oracle in Verse," he gives the love
of ornament as the real reason for the growth of metre as a form of
literary expression.
Often the topic is broached whether men like Hardy and Meredith are
greater as poets than as novelists. The question is not put properly. It
should be, Do these writers cease being poets when they use the fetters
of rhyme and metre, or are they with those fetters greater poets than
they were in their novels. I have no intention of trying to answer these
questions, though it is usually agreed that these writers are greater in
their novels than in their verse, but the point is that they are poets
whether they use prose or verse as their medium.
Some authors get more ecstasy into their work when they write in prose
than in verse, as readers of the novels and verse poems of Dickens,
George Eliot and Thackeray are aware. Other authors are successful in
crystallizing their ecstasy whether they write in prose or verse.
Goldsmith, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Shelley, Scott, Emerson, Poe, James
Thomson, B. V., Hardy, Meredith, Symons, Hugo, De Musset, Goethe and
Heine, are examples of masters of the literature of ecstasy in both
prose and verse. Other verse poets have not at all succeeded nor tried
to succeed in writing ecstasy in ordinary prose. The authors who have
given us ecstasy only in prose but have not tried to do so at all in
verse are too numerous to mention.
I believe that poetry will again return to the natural language of
prose. Critics are taking an entirely different stand toward rhythm,
admitting that the poets have the right to vary their measures, create
new rhythm and not be held in bondage to old verse forms. The day is
disappearing when a man like Hegel could say that a production not in
metre is not poetry. A sane attitude towards the free use of rhythms by
poets has been given us in a _New Study of English Poetry_ by Henry
Newbolt. Liberal critics are helping the poets break their shackles; the
following passage from a review of Newbolt's book, by J. Middleton Murry
is worth quoting:
Great Poets have always been those who believed that poetry
was by nature the worthiest vessel of the highest arguments of
which the soul of man is capable. Yet a poetic theory such as
this seems bound to include great prose, and not merely the
prose which can most easily be assimilated to the conditions
of poetry, such as Plato's _Republic_, or Milton's
_Areopagitica_, but the prose of the great novelists. Surely
the colloquial prose of Tchekov's _Cherry Orchard_ has as good
claim to be called poetry as _The Essay on Man_, _Tess of the
D'Urbervilles_ as _The Ring and the Book_, _The Possessed_ as
_Phedre_. Where are we to call a halt in the inevitable
progress by which the kinds of literary art merge into one? If
we insist that rhythm is essential to poetry, we are in danger
of confusing the accident with the essence, and of fastening
upon what will have to be in the last analysis a merely formal
difference. The difference in such must be substantial and
Poetry_, two excellent brochures in aesthetic criticism, take a similar
view point.
March 15, 1921. Premiers Poetes Du Vers Libre by Edouard Dujardin.
M. Harper in the preface to his _John Morley and Other Essays_, in
Richard Aldington's "The Art of Poetry," _The Dial_, August, 1920, and
the preface to F. S. Flint's _Otherworld_.
Our views of poetry, or the literature of ecstasy, illuminate many dark
crannies in one of the most unfathomable caverns of aesthetic
speculation; speculation of the connection between poetry and morals,
form and matter, art for art's sake and didacticism. It has been often
asked whether poetry should deal with moral subjects, sociological
questions, and philosophical ideas. The question disappears when we
regard literature of ecstasy in prose as poetry, for all ideas are dealt
with in prose and some may be ecstatically treated. If poetry is an
atmosphere that suffuses literature, it may bathe most various ideas.
Emotional treatment of the ideas gives us literature of ecstasy or
poetry. If the natural language of ecstasy is prose, we certainly do not
wish to see a train of philosophical, moral or sociological views
treated in verse. To this extent the old critic was right who did not
want poetry (a long composition in verse, as he understood it) to deal
with ethics or science.
The question is then not really whether poetry should be concerned with
moral, sociological or psychological themes, for these themes always
have poetry in them, and an emotional treatment of them brings the
poetry into prominence. Ideas are the substance of poetry and nearly all
ideas are moral, sociological or psychological. Even scientific facts
and metaphysical utterances may be so stated by a writer as to show the
latent poetry. The two famous passages in _Leaves of Grass_ beginning
"I open my scuttle at night" and "I am an acme of things accomplished
and an encloser of things to be" are emotional statements of the facts
of the infinity of the universe and of the evolution of man,
respectively; Whitman brought out the poetry in a philosophical and in a
scientific idea.
Moral views may be imaginatively treated and be poetry. The theme of
_Great Expectations_ is a sermon against pride and snobbery, and the
emotional treatment, especially by force of example, makes part of the
book poetry. Portrayals of hypocrites, for instance, so truthfully and
movingly artistic as to arouse an ecstatic state in the reader, become
poetry. Hence Tartuffe and Pecksniff are poetical portraits, even when
drawn in prose.
Poetry was supposed to appeal to the imagination, prose to the
intellect; poetry was presumed to be dictated by the heart, prose by the
mind; fancy was thought to hold sway in poetry, logic in prose. But
nevertheless, the great English poets like Shakespeare, Browning,