'Methought they did me beat and bind,
And took my bow me fro;
If I be Robin alive in this land,
I'll be wroken on both them two.'
'Swevens are swift, master,' quoth John,
'As the wind that blows o'er a hill;
For if it be never so loud this night,
Tomorrow it may be still.'
'Busk ye, bown ye, my merry men all,
For John shall go with me;
For I'll go seek yond wight yeomen
In greenwood where they be.'
They cast on their gown of green,
A shooting gone are they,
Until they came to the merry greenwood,
Where they had gladdest be;
There were they 'ware of a wight yeoman,
His body leaned to a tree.
A sword and a dagger he wore by his side,
Had been many a man's bane,
And he was clad in his capul-hide,
Top and tail and mane.
'Stand you still, master,' quoth Little John,
'Under this trusty tree,
And I will go to yond wight yeoman,
To know his meaning truly.'
'Ah, John, by me thou sets no store,
And that's a ferly thing;
How oft send I my men before,
And tarry myself behind?
'It is no cunning a knave to ken,
And a man but hear him speak;
And it were not for bursting of my bow,
John, I would thy head break.'
But often words they breeden bale;
That parted Robin and John;
John is gone to Barnesdale,
The gates he knows each one.
And when he came to Barnesdale,
Great heaviness there he had;
He found two of his fellows
Were slain both in a slade,
And Scarlet afoot flying was,
Over stocks and stone,
For the sheriff with seven score men
Fast after him is gone.
'Yet one shot I'll shoot,' says Little John,
'With Christ his might and main;
I'll make yond fellow that flies so fast
To be both glad and fain.'
John bent up a good yew bow,
And fettled him to shoot;
The bow was made of a tender bough,
And fell down to his foot.
'Woe worth thee, wicked wood,' said Little John,
'That e'er thou grew on a tree!
For this day thou art my bale,
My boot when thou should be.'
This shot it was but loosely shot,
The arrow flew in vain,
And it met one of the sheriff's men;
Good William a Trent was slain.
It had been better for William a Trent
To hang upon a gallow
Than for to lie in the greenwood,
There slain with an arrow.
And it is said, when men be met,
Six can do more than three:
And they have ta'en Little John,
And bound him fast to a tree.
'Thou shalt be drawn by dale and down,
And hanged high on a hill.'
'But thou may fail,' quoth Little John,
'If it be Christ's own will.'
Let us leave talking of Little John,
For he is bound fast to a tree,
And talk of Guy and Robin Hood
In the greenwood where they be;
How these two yeomen together they met,
Under the leaves of lyne,
To see what merchandise they made
Even at that same time.
'Good morrow, good fellow,' quoth Sir Guy;
'Good morrow, good fellow,' quoth he;
'Methinks by this bow thou bears in thy hand,
A good archer thou seems to be.
'I am wilful of my way,' quoth Sir Guy,
'And of my morning tide.'
'I'll lead thee through the wood,' quoth Robin,
'Good fellow, I'll be thy guide.'
'I seek an outlaw,' quoth Sir Guy,
'Men call him Robin Hood;
I had rather meet with him upon a day
Than forty pound of gold.'
'If you two met, it would be seen whether were better
Afore ye did part away;
Let us some other pastime find,
Good fellow, I thee pray.
'Let us some other masteries make,
And we will walk in the woods even;
We may chance meet with Robin Hood
At some unset steven.'
They cut them down the summer shroggs
Which grew both under a briar,
And set them three score rood in twain,
To shoot the pricks full near.
'Lead on, good fellow,' said Sir Guy,
'Lead on, I do bid thee.'
'Nay by my faith,' quoth Robin Hood,
'The leader thou shalt be.'
The first good shot that Robin led,
Did not shoot an inch the prick fro;
Guy was an archer good enough,
But he could ne'er shoot so.
The second shot Sir Guy shot,
He shot within the garland;
But Robin Hood shot it better than he,
For he clove the good prick-wand.
'God's blessing on thy heart!' says Guy,
'Good fellow, thy shooting is good;
For an thy heart be as good as thy hands,
Thou were better than Robin Hood.
'Tell me thy name, good fellow,' quoth Guy,
Under the leaves of lyne:
'Nay, by my faith,' quoth good Robin,
'Till thou have told me thine.'
'I dwell by dale and down,' quoth Guy,
'And I have done many a curst turn;
And he that calls me by my right name
Calls me Guy of good Gisborne.'
'My dwelling is in the wood,' says Robin;
'By thee I set right nought;
My name is Robin Hood of Barnesdale,
A fellow thou hast long sought.'
He that had neither been kith nor kin
Might have seen a full fair sight,
To see how together these yeomen went,
With blades both brown and bright;
To have seen how these yeomen together fought
Two hours of a summer's day;
It, was neither Guy nor Robin Hood
That fettled them to fly away.
Robin was reckless on a root,
And stumbled at that tide,
And Guy was quick and nimble withal,
And hit him o'er the left side.
'Ah, dear Lady!' said Robin Hood,
'Thou art both mother and may!
I think it was never man's destiny
To die before his day.'
Robin thought on Our Lady dear,
And soon leapt up again,
And thus he came with an awkward stroke;
Good Sir Guy he has slain.
He took Sir Guy's head by the hair,
And sticked it on his bow's end:
'Thou hast been traitor all thy life,
Which thing must have an end.'
Robin pulled forth an Irish knife,
And nicked Sir Guy in the face,
That he was never on a woman born
Could tell who Sir Guy was.
Says, 'Lie there, lie there, good Sir Guy,
And with me be not wroth;
If thou have had the worse strokes at my hand,
Thou shalt have the better cloth.'
Robin did off his gown of green,
Sir Guy he did it throw;
And he put on that capul-hide
That clad him top to toe.
'The bow, the arrows, and little horn,
And with me now I'll bear;
For now I will go to Barnesdale,
To see how my men do fare.'
Robin set Guy's horn to his mouth,
A loud blast in it he did blow;
That beheard the sheriff of Nottingham,
As he leaned under a low.
'Hearken! hearken!' said the sheriff,
'I heard no tidings but good;
For yonder I hear Sir Guy's horn blow,
For he hath slain Robin Hood.'
'For yonder I hear Sir Guy's horn blow,
It blows so well in tide,
For yonder comes that wighty yeoman,
Clad in his capul-hide.
'Come hither, thou good Sir Guy,
Ask of me what thou wilt have':
'I'll none of thy gold,' says Robin Hood,
'Nor I'll none of it have.'
'But now I have slain the master,' he said,
'Let me go strike the knave;
This is all the reward I ask,
Nor no other will I have.'
'Thou art a madman,' said the sheriff,
'Thou shouldest have had a knight's fee;
Seeing thy asking hath been so bad,
Well granted it shall be.'
But Little John heard his master speak,
Well he knew that was his steven;
'Now shall I be loosed,' quoth Little John,
'With Christ's might in heaven.'
But Robin he hied him towards Little John,
He thought he would loose him belive;
The sheriff and all his company
Fast after him did drive.
'Stand aback! stand aback!' said Robin;
'Why draw you me so near?
It was never the use in our country
One's shrift another should hear.'
But Robin pulled forth an Irish knife,
And loosed John hand and foot,
And gave him Sir Guy's bow in his hand,
And bade it be his boot.
But John took Guy's bow in his hand
(His arrows were rawsty by the root);
The sheriff saw Little John draw a bow
And fettle him to shoot.
Towards his house in Nottingham
He fled full fast away,
And so did all his company,
Not one behind did stay.
But he could neither so fast go,
Nor away so fast run,
But Little John, with an arrow broad,
Did cleave his heart in twain.
Halliwell, Child, Murray, Hales, and Furnivall, have variously
identified it with the woodpecker, woodlark, redbreast,
greenfinch, nuthatch, and 'golden ouzle.'
time of day.
'prick-wand,' or upright stick.
p. xlix.
+The Text+ is modernised from the Percy Folio MS. (c. 1650). At two
points, after 8.3 and 18.2, half a page of the MS., or about nine
stanzas, is missing--torn out and 'used by maids to light the fire'
in Humphry Pitt's house, where Percy discovered the volume (see
Introduction, First Series, xxxix.). At the end another half-page is
lacking, but Child thinks that it represents only a few verses. He also
indicates a lacuna after st. 4, though none appears in the MS.
+The Story+ of this version, mutilated as it is, agrees in its main
incidents with that given at the end of the _Gest_ (stt. 451-455).
Another variant, _Robin Hood's Death and Burial_, extant in two or three
eighteenth-century 'Garlands,' but none the less of good derivation,
gives no assistance at either hiatus, and we are left with a couple of
puzzles.
The opening of the ballad, stt. 1-6, should be compared with _Robin Hood
and the Monk_, stt. 6-10, where Much takes Will Scarlett's place. Robin,
shooting for a penny with Little John along the way, comes to a black
water with a plank across it, and an old woman on the plank is cursing
Robin Hood. He has been already reminded by Scarlett that he has a
yeoman foe at Kirklees; but neither the banning of the witch, nor the
weeping of others ('We,' 9.3), presumably women, deter him. The
explanation of the witch is lost.
Having arrived at Kirklees and submitted to being bled, Robin at length
suspects treason, and hints as much to Little John. The latter may be
indoors with his master, or, as Child thinks, calling to Robin through a
window from below. Here the second hiatus occurs; and when the ballad
resumes, we can only guess that st. 19 is Robin's final retort after an
altercation with somebody, presumably Red Roger, who is perhaps the
'yeoman' referred to by Will Scarlett. A final difficulty is raised by
the word 'mood' in st. 23; but Child's emendation is not improbable, and
Robin himself realises that he must take his 'housel' in an irregular
way.
In the Garland version Robin goes alone to Kirklees, where his 'cousin'
bleeds him, and leaves him to bleed all day and all night in a locked
room. He summons Little John with 'weak blasts three' of his horn, and
bids him dig a grave where the last arrow shot by Robin Hood falls.
'I will never eat nor drink,' Robin Hood said,
'Nor meat will do me no good,
Till I have been at merry Churchlees,
My veins for to let blood.'
'That I rede not,' said Will Scarlett,
'Master, by the assent of me,
Without half a hundred of your best bowmen
You take to go with ye.
'For there a good yeoman doth abide,
Will be sure to quarrel with thee,
And if thou have need of us, master,
In faith we will not flee.'
'And thou be fear'd, thou William Scarlett,
At home I rede thee be.'
'And you be wroth, my dear master,
You shall never hear more of me.'
...   ...   ...
'For there shall no man with me go,
Nor man with me ride,
And Little John shall be my man,
And bear my benbow by my side.'
'You'st bear your bow, master, yourself,
And shoot for a penny with me.'
'To that I do assent,' Robin Hood said,
'And so, John, let it be.'
They two bold children shotten together,
All day theirself in rank,
Until they came to black water,
And over it laid a plank.
Upon it there kneeled an old woman,
Was banning Robin Hood,
'Why dost thou ban Robin Hood?' said Robin,
...   ...   ...
...   ...   ...
To give to Robin Hood;
We weepen for his dear body,
That this day must be let blood.'
'The dame prior is my aunt's daughter,
And nigh unto my kin;
I know she would me no harm this day,
For all the world to win.'
Forth then shotten these children two,
And they did never lin,
Until they came to merry Churchlees,
To merry Churchlees within.
And when they came to merry Churchlees,
They knocked upon a pin;
Up then rose dame prioress,
And let good Robin in.
Then Robin gave to dame prioress
Twenty pound in gold,
And bade her spend while that would last,
And she should have more when she wold.
And down then came dame prioress,
Down she came in that ilk,
With a pair of blood-irons in her hands,
Were wrapped all in silk.
'Set a chafing-dish to the fire,' said dame prioress,
'And strip thou up thy sleeve!'
I hold him but an unwise man
That will no warning 'lieve.
She laid the blood-irons to Robin Hood's vein,
Alack, the more pity!
And pierced the vein, and let out the blood,
That full red was to see.
And first it bled the thick, thick blood,
And afterwards the thin,
And well then wist good Robin Hood
Treason there was within.
'What cheer, my master?' said Little John;
'In faith, Little John, little good;
...   ...   ...
...   ...   ...
'I have upon a gown of green,
Is cut short by my knee,
And in my hand a bright brown brand
That will well bite of thee.'
But forth then of a shot-window,
Good Robin Hood he could glide;
Red Roger, with a grounden glaive,
Thrust him through the milk-white side.
But Robin was light and nimble of foot,
And thought to abate his pride,
For between his head and his shoulders
He made a wound full wide.
Says, 'Lie there, lie there, Red Roger,
The dogs they must thee eat;
For I may have my housel,' he said,
'For I may both go and speak.
'Now give me mood,' Robin said to Little John,
'Give me mood with thy hand;
I trust to God in heaven so high
My housel will me bestand.'
'Now give me leave, give me leave, master,' he said,
'For Christ's love give leave to me
To set a fire within this hall,
And to burn up all Churchlee.'
'That I rede not,' said Robin Hood then,
'Little John, for it may not be;
If I should do any widow hurt, at my latter end,
God,' he said, 'would blame me;
'But take me upon thy back, Little John,
And bear me to yonder street,
And there make me a full fair grave
Of gravel and of greet.
And set my bright sword at my head,
Mine arrows at my feet,
And lay my yew-bow by my side,
My met-yard wi . . .'
however, no break in the MS.
the consecrated Host. He admits it is a bold emendation, but
cites some striking parallels in support of it.
+The Text.+--The earliest complete text, here given, was printed by
William Copland between 1548 and 1568: there are extant two printed
fragments, one printed by John Byddell in 1536, and the other in a type
older than Copland's. Later, there are two editions printed by James
Roberts in 1605; and finally a MS. text in the Percy Folio (c. 1650).
Copland's text is obviously full of faults, and in emendations I have
mostly followed Child.
+The Story+, lively and admirably told, contains little extrinsic
interest, except in William's feat of shooting the apple from his son's
head. This is inevitably associated with the legend of William Tell,
which is told in the White Book of Obwalden, written about 1470; but
similar stories can be found in the Icelandic Saga of Dietrich of Bern
(about 1250) and in Saxo Grammaticus, who wrote his Danish History about
the year 1200. Three or four other versions of the story are to be found
in German and Scandinavian literature before the date of our ballad;
but they all agree in two points which are missing in the English
ballad--the shot is compulsory, and the archer reserves another arrow
for purposes of revenge in case he misses his mark. William of Cloudesly
volunteers a difficult and risky feat out of bravado.
The rescue of Cloudesly by Adam Bell and Clym of the Clough may be
compared with the rescue of Robin Hood by Little John and Much in _Robin
Hood and the Monk_, stt. 61-81 (see pp. 107-110).
Mery it was in grene forest
Among the leves grene,
Wher that men walke both east and west
Wyth bowes and arrowes kene;
To ryse the dere out of theyr denne;
Suche sightes as hath ofte bene sene,
As by thre yemen of the north countrey,
By them it is as I meane.
The one of them hight Adam Bel,
The other Clym of the Clough,
The thyrd was William of Cloudesly,
An archer good ynough.
They were outlawed for venyson,
These thre yemen everychone;
They swore them brethren upon a day,
To Englyshe-wood for to gone.
Now lith and lysten, gentylmen,
And that of myrthes loveth to here;
Two of them were single men,
The third had a wedded fere.
Wyllyam was the wedded man,
Muche more then was hys care:
He sayde to hys brethren upon a day,
To Carlile he would fare,
For to speke with fayre Alyce his wife,
And with hys chyldren thre:
'By my trouth,' sayde Adam Bel,
'Not by the counsell of me:
'For if ye go to Carlile, brother,
And from thys wylde wode wende,
If that the justice may you take,
Your lyfe were at an ende.'
'If that I come not to-morrowe, brother,
By pryme to you agayne,
Truste not els but that I am take,
Or else that I am slayne.'
He toke hys leave of hys brethren two,
And to Carlel he is gone;
There he knocked at his owne windowe
Shortlye and anone.
'Wher be you, fayre Alyce, my wyfe,
And my chyldren three?
Lyghtly let in thyne husbande,
Wyllyam of Cloudeslee.'
'Alas!' then sayde fayre Alyce,
And syghed wonderous sore,
'Thys place hath ben besette for you
Thys halfe yere and more.'
'Now am I here,' sayde Cloudeslee,
'I would that in I were.
Now feche us meate and drynke ynough,
And let us make good chere.'
She feched hym meate and drynke plenty,
Lyke a true wedded wyfe;
And pleased hym with that she had,
Whome she loved as her lyfe.
There lay an old wyfe in that place,
A lytle besyde the fyre,
Whych Wyllyam had found of cherytye
More then seven yere.
Up she rose, and walked full still,
Evel mote shee spede therfore!
For she had not set no fote on ground
In seven yere before.
She went unto the justice hall,
As fast as she could hye:
'Thys night is come unto this town
Wyllyam of Cloudesle.'
Thereof the justice was full fayne,
And so was the shirife also:
'Thou shalt not travaile hither, dame, for nought,
Thy meed thou shalt have er thou go.'
They gave to her a ryght good goune,
Of scarlat it was, as I heard sayne;
She toke the gyft, and home she wente,
And couched her doune agayne.
They rysed the towne of mery Carlel,
In all the hast that they can;
And came thronging to Wyllyames house,
As fast as they might gone.
There they besette that good yeman
Round about on every syde:
Wyllyam hearde great noyse of folkes,
That heyther-ward they hyed.
Alyce opened a shot-windowe,
And loked all aboute,
She was ware of the justice and the shirife bothe,
Wyth a full great route.
'Alas! treason,' cryed Alyce,
'Ever wo may thou be!
Goe into my chamber, my husband,' she sayd,
'Swete Wyllyam of Cloudesle.'
He toke his sweard and hys bucler,
Hys bow and hys chyldren thre,
And wente into hys strongest chamber,
Where he thought surest to be.
Fayre Alyce followed him as a lover true,
With a pollaxe in her hande:
'He shall be deade that here cometh in
Thys dore, while I may stand.'
Cloudeslee bente a wel good bowe,
That was of trusty tre,
He smot the justise on the brest,
That hys arowe brest in thre.
'God's curse on his hart,' saide William,
'Thys day thy cote dyd on!
If it had ben no better then myne,
It had gone nere thy bone.'
'Yelde thee, Cloudesle,' sayd the justise,
'And thy bowe and thy arrowes the fro.'
'God's curse on hys hart,' sayd fair Alyce,
'That my husband councelleth so.'
'Set fyre on the house,' saide the sherife,
'Syth it wyll no better be,
And brenne we therin William,' he saide,
'Hys wyfe and chyldren thre.'
They fyred the house in many a place,
The fyre flew up on hye:
'Alas!' than cryed fayr Alice.
'I se we shall here dye.'
William openyd hys backe wyndow,
That was in hys chamber on hie,
And with sheetes let hys wyfe downe
And hys children three.
'Have here my treasure,' sayde William,
'My wyfe and my chyldren thre:
For Christes love do them no harme,
But wreke you all on me.'
Wyllyam shot so wonderous well,
Tyll hys arrowes were all go,
And the fyre so fast upon hym fell,
That hys bowstryng brent in two.
The spercles brent and fell hym on,
Good Wyllyam of Cloudesle;
But than was he a wofull man, and sayde,
'Thys is a cowardes death to me.
'Lever I had,' sayde Wyllyam,
'With my sworde in the route to renne,
Then here among myne enemyes wode
Thus cruelly to bren.'
He toke hys sweard and hys buckler,
And among them all he ran,
Where the people were most in prece
He smote downe many a man.
There myght no man stand hys stroke,
So fersly on them he ran:
Then they threw wyndowes and dores on him
And so toke that good yeman.
There they hym bounde both hand and fote,
And in a deepe dongeon him cast:
'Now, Cloudesle,' sayd the hye justice,
'Thou shalt be hanged in hast.'
'One vow shal I make,' sayde the sherife,
'A payre of new gallowes shal I for thee make;
And all the gates of Carlile shal be shutte:
There shall no man come in therat.
'Then shall not helpe Clym of the Cloughe,
Nor yet Adam Bell,
Though they came with a thousand mo,
Nor all the devels in hell.'
Early in the mornyng the justice uprose,
To the gates fast gan he gon,
And commaunded to be shut full close
Lightile everychone.
Then went he to the markett place,
As fast as he coulde hye;
A payre of new gallowes there dyd he up set,
Besyde the pyllorye.
A lytle boy stood them among,
And asked what meaned that gallow-tre?
They sayde, 'To hange a good yeman,
Called Wyllyam of Cloudesle.'
That lytle boye was the towne swyne-heard,
And kept fayre Alyce swyne;
Full oft he had seene Cloudesle in the wodde,
And geven hym there to dyne.
He went out of a crevis in the wall,
And lightly to the woode dyd gone;
There met he with these wight yonge men
Shortly and anone.
'Alas!' then sayde that lytle boye,
'Ye tary here all too longe;
Cloudeslee is taken, and dampned to death,
All readye for to honge.'
'Alas!' then sayd good Adam Bell,
'That ever we see thys daye!
He might here with us have dwelled,
So ofte as we dyd him praye.
'He myght have taryed in grene foreste,
Under the shadowes sheene,
And have kepte both hym and us in reste,
Out of trouble and teene.'
Adam bent a ryght good bow,
A great hart sone had he slayne:
'Take that, chylde,' he sayde, 'to thy dynner,
And bryng me myne arrowe agayne.'
'Now go we hence,' sayed these wight yong men,
'Tarry we no longer here;
We shall hym borowe, by God's grace,
Though we buy itt full dere.'
To Caerlel wente these good yemen,
In a mery mornyng of Maye.
Here is a fyt of Cloudesly,
And another is for to saye.
And when they came to mery Caerlell,
In a fayre mornyng-tyde,
They founde the gates shut them untyll
Round about on every syde.
'Alas!' than sayd good Adam Bell,
'That ever we were made men!
These gates be shut so wonderly well,
That we may not come herein.'
Than spake Clym of the Clough,
'Wyth a wyle we wyl us in bryng;
Let us saye we be messengers,
Streyght comen from our king.'
Adam said, 'I have a letter written wele,
Now let us wysely werke,
We wyl saye we have the kynges seale;
I holde the porter no clerke.'
Than Adam Bell bete on the gate
With strokes great and stronge:
The porter herde suche a noyse therat,
And to the gate faste he thronge.
'Who is there now,' sayde the porter,
'That maketh all this knockinge?'
'We be two messengers,' sayd Clim of the Clough,
'Be comen streyght from our kyng.'
'We have a letter,' sayd Adam Bell,
'To the justice we must it bryng;
Let us in our message to do,
That we were agayne to our kyng.'
'Here commeth no man in,' sayd the porter,
'By hym that dyed on a tre,
Tyll a false thefe be hanged
Called Wyllyam of Cloudesle.'
Than spake that good yeman Clym of the Clough,
And swore by Mary fre,
'If that we stande long wythout,
Lyke a thefe hanged shalt thou be.
'Lo! here we have got the kynges seale:
What, lordane, art thou wode?'
The porter had wende it had ben so,
And lyghtly dyd off hys hode.
'Welcome be my lordes seale,' saide he;
'For that ye shall come in.'
He opened the gate right shortly:
An evyl openyng for him!
'Now we are in,' sayde Adam Bell,
'Therof we are full faine;
But Christ knoweth, that harowed hell,
How we shall com out agayne.'
'Had we the keys,' said Clim of the Clough,
'Ryght wel than shoulde we spede,
Than might we come out wel ynough
Whan we se tyme and nede.'
They called the porter to a councell,
And wrong his necke in two,
And caste hym in a depe dongeon,
And toke the keys hym fro.
'Now am I porter,' sayd Adam Bel,
'Se, brother, the keys have we here,
The worst porter to mery Carlile
That ye had thys hondreth yere.
'Now wyll we our bowes bend,
Into the towne wyll we go,
For to delyver our dere brother,
Where he lyeth in care and wo.'
Then they bent theyr good yew bowes,
And loked theyr stringes were round;
The markett place of mery Carlile
They beset in that stound.
And, as they loked them besyde,
A paire of new galowes there they see,
And the justice with a quest of squyers,
That judged William hanged to be.
And Cloudesle hymselfe lay ready in a cart
Fast bound both fote and hand;
And a stronge rope about hys necke,
All readye for to be hangde.
The justice called to him a ladde,
Cloudesles clothes shold he have,
To take the measure of that good yoman,
And thereafter to make hys grave.
'I have sene as great a mervaile,' said Cloudesle,
'As betweyne thys and pryme,
He that maketh thys grave for me,
Hymselfe may lye therin.'
'Thou speakest proudlye,' said the justice,
'I shall hange thee with my hande.'
Full wel that herd his brethren two
There styl as they dyd stande.
Then Cloudesle cast his eyen asyde,
And saw hys brethren stande
At a corner of the market place,
With theyr good bowes bent in theyr hand,
Redy the justyce for to chase.
'I se good comfort,' sayd Cloudesle,
'Yet hope I well to fare,
If I might have my handes at wyll
Ryght lytel wold I care.'
Than bespake good Adam Bell
To Clym of the Clough so free,
'Brother, se ye marke the justyce wel;
Lo! yonder ye may him se:
'And at the shyrife shote I wyll
Strongly wyth an arrowe kene;
A better shote in mery Carlile
Thys seven yere was not sene.'
They loosed their arrowes both at once,
Of no man had they drede;
The one hyt the justice, the other the sheryfe,
That both theyr sides gan blede.
All men voyded, that them stode nye,
Whan the justice fell to the grounde,
And the sherife fell nye hym by;
Eyther had his deathes wounde.
All the citezens fast gan fle,
They durst no longer abyde:
There lyghtly they loosed Cloudeslee,
Where he with ropes lay tyde.
Wyllyam stert to an officer of the towne,
Hys axe out hys hand he wronge,
On eche syde he smote them downe,
Hym thought he had taryed too long.
Wyllyam sayde to hys brethren two,
'Thys daye let us lyve and die,
If ever you have nede, as I have now,
The same shall you finde by me.'
They shot so well in that tyde,
For theyr stringes were of silke ful sure,
That they kept the stretes on every side;
That batayle did long endure.
They fought together as brethren true,
Lyke hardy men and bolde,
Many a man to the ground they threw,
And made many an herte colde.
But whan their arrowes were all gon,
Men presyd on them full fast,
They drew theyr swordes than anone,
And theyr bowes from them cast.
They went lyghtlye on theyr way,
Wyth swordes and buclers round;
By that it was the myddes of the day,
They had made many a wound.
There was many an out-horne in Carleil blowen,
And the belles backward dyd they ryng,
Many a woman sayde 'Alas!'
And many theyr handes dyd wryng.
The mayre of Carlile forth com was,
And wyth hym a full great route:
These three yemen dred hym full sore,
For theyr lyves stode in doute.
The mayre came armed, a full great pace,
With a polaxe in hys hande;
Many a strong man wyth him was,
There in that stoure to stande.
The mayre smote at Cloudesle with his bil,
Hys bucler he brast in two,
Full many a yoman with great yll,
'Alas! Treason,' they cryed for wo.
'Kepe we the gates fast,' they bad,
'That these traytours therout not go.'
But al for nought was that they wrought,
For so fast they downe were layde,
Tyll they all thre, that so manfully fought,
Were gotten without at a braide.
'Have here your keys,' sayd Adam Bel,
'Myne office I here forsake,
Yf you do by my councell
A newe porter ye make.'
He threw the keys there at theyr heads,
And bad them evil to thryve,
And all that letteth any good yoman
To come and comfort his wyfe.
Thus be these good yomen gon to the wode,
As lyghtly as lefe on lynde;
They laugh and be mery in theyr mode,
Theyr enemyes were farr behynde.
Whan they came to Inglyswode,
Under their trysty-tre,
There they found bowes full good,
And arrowes great plente.
'So help me God,' sayd Adam Bell,
And Clym of the Clough so fre,
'I would we were nowe in mery Carlile,
Before that fayre meyne.'
They set them downe, and made good chere,
And eate and dranke full well.
Here is a fytte of the wight yongemen:
And another I shall you tell.
As they sat in Inglyswood,
Under theyr trysty-tre,
They thought they herd a woman wepe,
But her they myght not se.
Sore syghed there fayre Alyce, and sayd,
'Alas, that ever I see thys day!
For nowe is my dere husband slayne:
Alas! and wel-a-way!
'Myght I have spoken wyth hys dere brethren,
With eyther of them twayne,
To show to them what him befell,
My hart were out of payne.'
Cloudesle walked a lytle beside,
And looked under the grene wood lynde,
He was ware of his wife and chyldren three,
Full wo in herte and mynde.
'Welcome, wyfe,' than sayde Wyllyam,
'Unto this trysty-tre:
I had wende yesterday, by swete saynt John,
Thou sholde me never have se.'
'Now well is me,' she sayd, 'that ye be here,
My harte is out of wo.'
'Dame,' he sayde, 'be mery and glad,
And thanke my brethren two.'
'Herof to speake,' said Adam Bell,
'I-wis it is no bote:
The meate, that we must supp withall,
It runneth yet fast on fote.'
Then went they downe into a launde,
These noble archares all thre;
Eche of them slew a hart of grece,
The best they cold there se.
'Have here the best, Alyce my wyfe,'
Sayde Wyllyam of Cloudeslye,
'By cause ye so boldly stode me by
Whan I was slayne full nye.'
Than went they to theyr suppere
Wyth suche meate as they had;
And thanked God of ther fortune:
They were both mery and glad.
And when they had supped well,
Certayne withouten lease,
Cloudesle sayd, 'We wyll to our kyng,
To get us a charter of peace.
'Alyce shal be at sojournyng
In a nunnery here besyde;
My two sonnes shall wyth her go,
And there they shall abyde.
'Myne eldest son shall go wyth me;
For hym have I no care:
And he shall bring you worde agayn,
How that we do fare.'
Thus be these wight men to London gone,
As fast as they maye hye,
Tyll they came to the kynges pallace;
There they woulde nedes be.
And whan they came to the kynges courte,
Unto the pallace gate,
Of no man wold they aske leave,
But boldly went in therat.
They presyd prestly into the hall,
Of no man had they dreade:
The porter came after, and dyd them calle,
And with them began to chyde.
The usher sayde, 'Yemen, what wold ye have?
I pray you tell to me:
You myght thus make offycers shent:
Good syrs, of whence be ye?'
'Syr, we be outlawes of the forest
Certayne withouten lease;
And hyther we be come to our kyng,
To get us a charter of peace.'
And whan they came before the kyng,
As it was the lawe of the lande,
They kneled downe without lettyng,
And eche held up his hand.
They sayed, 'Lord, we beseche you here,
That ye wyll graunt us grace;
For we have slayne your fat falow dere
In many a sondry place.'
'What is your names,' than said our king,
'Anone that you tell me?'
They sayd, 'Adam Bell, Clim of the Clough,
And Wyllyam of Cloudesle.'
'Be ye those theves,' than sayd our kyng,
'That men have tolde of to me?
Here to God I make a vowe,
Ye shal be hanged al thre.
'Ye shal be dead without mercy,
As I am kynge of this lande.'
He commanded his officers everichone,
Fast on them to lay hande.
There they toke these good yemen,
And arested them al thre:
'So may I thryve,' sayd Adam Bell,
'Thys game lyketh not me.
'But, good lorde, we beseche you now,
That ye wyll graunt us grace,
Insomuche as we be to you comen,
Or elles that we may fro you passe,
'With such weapons, as we have here,
Tyll we be out of your place;
And yf we lyve this hondred yere,
We wyll aske you no grace.'
'Ye speake proudly,' sayd the kynge;
'Ye shall be hanged all thre.'
'That were great pitye,' sayd the quene,
'If any grace myght be.
'My lorde, whan I came fyrst into this lande
To be your wedded wyfe,
The fyrst boone that I would aske,
Ye would graunt me belyfe:
'And I asked you never none tyll now;
Therefore, good lorde, graunt it me.'
'Now aske it, madam,' sayd the kynge,
'And graunted shal it be.'
'Than, good lord, I you beseche,
These yemen graunt you me.'
'Madame, ye myght have asked a boone,
That shuld have been worth them thre.
'Ye myght have asked towres, and townes,
Parkes and forestes plentie.'
'None soe pleasant to my pay,' shee sayd;
'Nor none so lefe to me.'
'Madame, sith it is your desyre,
Your askyng graunted shal be;
But I had lever have given you
Good market townes thre.'
The quene was a glad woman,
And sayde, 'Lord, gramarcy;
I dare undertake for them,
That true men shal they be.
'But, good lord, speke som mery word,
That comfort they may se.'
'I graunt you grace,' than sayd our kyng;
'Washe, felos, and to meate go ye.'
They had not setten but a whyle
Certayne without lesynge,
There came messengers out of the north
With letters to our kyng.
And whan they came before the kynge,
They kneled downe upon theyr kne;
And sayd, 'Lord, your officers grete you well,
Of Carlile in the north cuntre.'
'How fareth my justice,' sayd the kyng,
'And my sherife also?'
'Syr, they be slayne, without lesynge,
And many an officer mo.'
'Who hath them slayne?' sayd the kyng;
'Anone thou tell me.'
'Adam Bell, and Clim of the Clough,
And Wyllyam of Cloudesle.'
'Alas for rewth!' than said our kynge:
'My hart is wonderous sore;
I had lever than a thousande pounde,
I had knowne of thys before;
'For I have y-graunted them grace,
And that forthynketh me:
But had I knowne all thys before,
They had been hanged all thre.'
The kyng opened the letter anone,
Himselfe he red it tho,
And founde how these thre outlawes had slain
Thre hundred men and mo:
Fyrst the justice, and the sheryfe,
And the mayre of Carlile towne;
Of all the constables and catchipolles
Alyve were left not one:
The baylyes, and the bedyls both,
And the sergeauntes of the law,
And forty fosters of the fe,
These outlawes had y-slaw:
And broke his parks, and slayne his dere;
Over all they chose the best;
So perelous out-lawes as they were
Walked not by easte nor west.
When the kynge this letter had red,
In hys harte he syghed sore:
'Take up the table,' anone he bad,
'For I may eat no more.'
The kyng called his best archars
To the buttes wyth hym to go:
'I wyll se these felowes shote,' he sayd,
'That in the north have wrought this wo.'
The kynges bowmen buske them blyve.
And the quenes archers also;
So dyd these thre wyght yemen;
With them they thought to go.
There twyse or thryse they shote about
For to assay theyr hande;
There was no shote these thre yemen shot.
That any prycke myght them stand.
Then spake Wyllyam of Cloudesle;
'By God that for me dyed,
I hold hym never no good archar,
That shoteth at buttes so wyde.'
'Whereat?' than sayd our king,
'I pray thee tell me.'
'At suche a but, syr,' he sayd.
'As men use in my countree.'
Wyllyam wente into a fyeld,
And his two brethren with him:
There they set up two hasell roddes
Twenty score paces betwene.
'I hold him an archar,' said Cloudesle,
'That yonder wande cleveth in two.'
'Here is none suche,' sayd the kyng,
'Nor none that can so do.'
'I shall assaye, syr,' sayd Cloudesle,
'Or that I farther go.'
Cloudesly with a bearyng arowe
Clave the wand in two.
'Thou art the best archer,' then said the king,
'Forsothe that ever I se.'
'And yet for your love,' sayd Wyllyam,
'I wyll do more maystry.
'I have a sonne is seven yere olde,
He is to me full deare;
I wyll hym tye to a stake;
All shall se, that be here;
'And lay an apple upon hys head,
And go syxe score paces hym fro,
And I my selfe with a brode arow
Shall cleve the apple in two.'
'Now haste thee then sayd the kyng,
'By hym that dyed on a tre;
But yf thou do not as thou hest sayde,
Hanged shalt thou be.
'And thou touche his head or gowne,
In syght that men may se,
By all the sayntes that be in heaven,
I shall hange you all thre.'
'That I have promised,' said William,
'I wyll it never forsake.'
And there even before the kynge
In the earth he drove a stake:
And bound therto his eldest sonne,
And bad hym stand styll thereat;
And turned the childes face fro him,
Because he should not stert.
An apple upon his head he set,
And then his bowe he bent:
Syxe score paces they were outmet,
And thether Cloudesle went.
There he drew out fayre brode arrowe,
Hys bowe was great and longe,
He set that arrowe in his bowe,
That was both styffe and stronge.
He prayed the people, that wer there,
That they wold still stand,
For he that shoteth for such a wager
Behoveth a stedfast hand.
Muche people prayed for Cloudesle,
That his lyfe saved myght be,
And whan he made hym redy to shote,
There was many a weeping eye.
Thus Cloudesle clefte the apple in two,
That many a man it se:
'Over Gods forbode,' sayde the kinge,
'That thou sholdest shote at me.
'I geve thee eightene pence a day,
And my bowe shalt thou bere,
And over all the north countre
I make the chyfe rydere.'
'And I give thee twelve pence a day,' said the quene,
'By God and by my fay;
Come feche thy payment whan thou wylt,
No man shall say thee nay.'
'Wyllyam, I make thee gentleman
Of clothyng and of fe:
And thy two brethren yemen of my chambre,
For they are so semely to see.
'Your sonne, for he is tendre of age,
Of my wyne-seller shall he be;
And whan he commeth to mannes state,
Better avaunced shall he be.'
'And, Wyllyam, bring me your wife,' said the quene,
'Me longeth sore her to see:
She shall be my chefe gentlewoman,
And governe my nursery.'
The yemen thanked them full curteously;
And sayd, 'To Rome streyght wyll we wend,
Of all the synnes that we have done
To be assoyled of his hand.'
So forth be gone these good yemen,
As fast as they might hye;
And after came and dwelled with the kynge,
And dyed good men all thre.
Thus endeth the lives of these good yemen;
God send them eternall blysse,
And all that with hand-bowe shoteth,
That of heven they may never mysse!
in Cumberland.
authorities.
to the crown a perpetual right of hunting in a forest on paying
to the crown a certain rent for the same.' --Halliwell.
be carried in the hand. Cf. _Sir Andrew Barton_, 53.3.
+The Text+ is taken almost entirely from a copy which was sent in 1780
to Bishop Percy by a Miss Fisher of Carlisle; in the last half of the
first stanza her version gives, unintelligibly:
'But little knew he that his bloody hounds
Were bound in iron bands':
and I have therefore substituted lines from a later text. The correction
in 20.1 and 21.1 is also essential.
+The Story+ will be familiar to many as _Johnie of Breadislee_, a title
given by Sir Walter Scott to his version, the first that was published,
in the _Minstrelsy_ (1802). In the present version, however, Johnny
certainly belongs to Cockley's Well, Bradyslee being only the name of
his hunting-ground. In other variants, his name is Johnny Cock, Johnny
Cox, Johnny o' Cockis, o' Cockerslee, of Cockielaw, of Cocklesmuir, or
Johnny Brad. The name of the hunting-ground varies also, though not so
widely; and, as usual, the several editors of the ballad have carefully
noted that its topography (though the nomenclature is corrupted)
connects it with this district or that--Percy's ballad is Northumbrian,
Scott's is of Dumfriesshire.
Percy considered that the mention of wolves (17.1) was an indication of
the antiquity of the ballad; whereupon Child quotes Holinshed (1577) as
saying that 'though the island is void of wolves south of the Tweed, yet
the Scots cannot boast the like, since they have grievous wolves.' Yet
how can one reconcile the mention of wolves with the reference to
'American leather' (13.3)?
Professor Child calls this a 'precious specimen of the unspoiled
traditional ballad,' and Professor Gummere points out that 'it goes with
a burden, this sterling old song, and has traces of an incremental
repetition that has been reduced to lowest terms by impatient
transcribers' (_The Popular Ballad_, p. 268). In his _Old English
Ballads_ Gummere gives a text very ingeniously compounded of Percy's and
Kinloch's; and Professor Brandl has attempted to restore the original
text.
Johnny he has risen up i' the morn,
Call'd for water to wash his hands;
And he has called for his good grey-hounds
That lay bound in iron bands, _bands_,
_That lay bound in iron bands_.
Johnny's mother has gotten word o' that,
And care-bed she has taen.
'O Johnny, for my benison,
I beg you'll stay at hame;
For the wine so red, and the well-baken bread,
My Johnny shall want nane.
'There are seven forsters at Pickeram Side,
At Pickeram where they dwell,
And for a drop of thy heart's bluid
They wad ride the fords of hell.'
Johnny he's gotten word of that,
And he's turned wondrous keen;
He's put off the red scarlet,
And he's put on the Lincoln green.
With a sheaf of arrows by his side,
And a bent bow in his hand,
He's mounted on a prancing steed,
And he has ridden fast o'er the strand.
He's up i' Bradyslee, and down i' Bradyslee,
And under a buss o' broom;
And there he found a good dun deer
Feeding in a buss of ling.
Johnny shot, and the dun deer lap,
And she lap wondrous wide,
Until they came to the wan water,
And he stem'd her of her pride.
He has taen out the little pen-knife,
'Twas full three quarters long,
And he has taen out of that dun deer
The liver but and the tongue.
They eat of the flesh, and they drank of the blood,
And the blood it was so sweet,
Which caused Johnny and his bloody hounds
To fall in a deep sleep.
By then came an old palmer,
And an ill death may he die!
For he's away to Pickeram Side,
As fast as he can drie.
'What news, what news?' says the Seven Forsters,
'What news have ye brought to me?'
'I have no news,' the palmer said,
'But what I saw with my eye.
'High up i' Bradyslee, low down i' Bradyslee,
And under a buss of scroggs,
O there I spied a well-wight man
Sleeping among his dogs.
'His coat it was of the light Lincoln,
And his breeches of the same,
His shoes of the American leather,
And gold buckles tying them.'
Up bespake the Seven Forsters,
Up bespake they ane and a':
'O that is Johnny o' Cockley's Well,
And near him we will draw.'
O the first ae stroke that they gae him,
They struck him off by the knee;
Then up bespake his sister's son:
'O the next'll gar him die!'
'O some they count ye well-wight men,
But I do count ye nane;
For you might well ha' waken'd me,
And ask'd gin I wad be taen.
'The wildest wolf in a' this wood
Wad not ha' done so by me;
She'd ha' wet her foot i' th' wan water,
And sprinkled it o'er my bree,
And if that wad not ha' waken'd me,
She wad ha' gone and let me be.
'O bows of yew, if ye be true,
In London, where ye were bought,
Fingers five, get up belive,
Manhuid shall fail me nought.'
He has kill'd the Seven Forsters,
He has kill'd them all but ane,
And that wan scarce to Pickeram Side,
To carry the bode-words hame.
'Is there never a bird in a' this wood
That will tell what I can say;
That will go to Cockley's Well,
Tell my mither to fetch me away?'
There was a bird into that wood,
That carried the tidings away,
And many ae was the well-wight man
At the fetching o' Johnny away.
in italics, forms the burden in singing, and is to be repeated,
_mutatis mutandis_, in each verse.
horsehides was granted c. 1799, but the date of this text is
twenty years earlier than that date.
+The Text+ is derived, with trivial alterations, from Herd's MSS. In the
first edition of the _Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border_, Scott says the
principal copy he employed was one 'apparently of considerable
antiquity' among the papers of Mrs. Cockburn; he also made use of Herd's
MS. and the Glenriddell MS. In the second edition of the _Minstrelsy_ he
made further additions, including one of three stanzas between 52 and 58
of the present version, which makes reference to an earlier Sir Walter
Scott.
+The Story+ of this Scots outlaw makes tame reading after those which
precede it in this volume. The ballad was inserted at the end of Child's
collection only because he preferred 'to err by including rather than
excluding.' He adds, 'I am convinced that it did not begin its existence
as a popular ballad, and I am not convinced that (as Scott asserts) it
has been for ages a popular song in Selkirkshire.' Nevertheless, it
undoubtedly gained a place in popular tradition; and this, while
entitling it to a place here, renders the elaborate historical
investigation, to which it has been submitted since Child's edition,
a waste of erudition and ingenuity.
Ettrick Forest is a fair forest,
In it grows many a seemly tree;
The hart, the hynd, the doe, the roe,
And of a' wild beastis great plentie.
There's a castell biggit with lime and stane;
O gin it stands not pleasantlie!
In the forefront o' that castell fair,
Twa unicorns are bra' to see.
There's the picture of a knight, and a ladye bright,
And the grene hollin abune their bree;
There an Outlaw keeps five hundred men;
He keeps a royal companie.
His merry men are in ae liverie clad,
Of the Lincoln grene sae fair to see;
He and his ladie in purple clad,
O gin they live not royallie!
Word is gane to our noble king,
In Edinburgh, where that he lay,
That there was an Outlaw in Ettrick Forest
Counted him nought and all his courtrie gay.
'I mak a vow,' then the gude king said,
'Unto the man that dear bought me,
I'se either be king of Ettrick Forest
Or king of Scotland that Outlaw's be.'
Then spak the earl hight Hamilton,
And to the noble king said he,
'My sovereign prince, some counsel take,
First of your nobles, syne of me.
'I redd ye, send yon bra' Outlaw till,
And see gif your man come will he:
Desire him come and be your man,
And hold of you yon forest free.
'And gif he refuses to do that,
We'll conquer both his lands and he,
Or else we'll throw his castell down,
And mak a widow o' his gay ladye.'
The king called on a gentleman,
James Boyd, Earl of Arran, his brother was he;
When James he came before the king,
He fell before him on his knee.
'Welcome, James Boyd,' said our noble king;
'A message ye maun gang for me;
Ye maun hie to Ettrick Forest,
To yon Outlaw, where dwelleth he;
'Ask him of whom he holds his lands,
Or, man, who may his master be,
Desire him come and be my man,
And hold of me yon forest free.
'To Edinburgh to come and gang,
His safe-warrant I sall be;
And gif he refuses to do that,
We'll conquer baith his lands and he.
'Thou may'st vow I'll cast his castell down,
And mak a widow o' his gay ladye;
I'll hang his merry men pair by pair
In ony frith where I may them see.'
James Boyd took his leave of the noble king,
To Ettrick Forest fair cam he;
Down Birkendale Brae when that he cam,
He saw the fair forest with his ee.
Baith doe and roe and hart and hind
And of a' wild beastis great plentie;
He heard the bows that bauldly ring,
And arrows whidderand near him by.
Of that fair castell he got a sight;
The like he nere saw with his ee;
On the forefront o' that castell
Twa unicorns were bra' to see.
The picture of a knight, and a lady bright,
And the green hollin abune their bree;
Thereat he spy'd five hundred men,
Shooting with bows upon the lee.
They a' were in ae livery clad,
O' the Lincoln green sae fair to see;
The knight and his ladye in purple clad;
O gif they lived right royallie!
Therefore he kend he was master-man,
And served him in his ain degree.
'God mot thee save, brave Outlaw Murray,
Thy ladye and a' thy chivalrie!'
'Marry, thou's welcome, gentleman,
Some king's-messenger thou seems to be.'
'The King of Scotland sent me here,
And, gude Outlaw, I'm sent to thee;
I wad wot of whom ye hold your lands,
Or, man, wha may thy master be?'
'Thir landis are mine,' the Outlaw said;
'I own na king in Christentie;
Frae Soudron I this forest wan,
Whan the king nor 's knights were not to see.'
'He desires you'll come to Edinburgh,
And hold of him this forest free;
And gif you refuse to do this,
He'll conquer baith thy landis and thee;
He has vow'd to cast thy castell down,
And mak a widow o' thy gay ladye;
'He'll hang thy merry men pair by pair
In ony frith where he may them find.'
'Aye, by my troth!' the Outlaw said,
'Than wad I think me far behind.
'Ere the king my fair countrie get,
This land that 's nativest to me,
Mony o' his nobles sall be cauld,
Their ladyes sall be right wearie.'
Then spak his ladye, fair of face,
She said, 'Without consent of me,
That an Outlaw shuld come before the king;
I am right rad of treasonrie.
'Bid him be gude to his lordis at hame,
For Edinburgh my lord sail never see.'
James tuke his leave of the Outlaw keen,
To Edinburgh boun is he.
And when he cam before the king,
He fell before him on his knee:
'Welcome, James Boyd!' said the noble king;
'What forest is Ettrick Forest free?'
'Ettrick Forest is the fairest forest
That ever man saw with his ee;
There's the doe, the roe, the hart, the hynde,
And of a' wild beastis great plentie.
'There's a pretty castell of lime and stane,
O gif it stands not pleasauntlie!
There's on the foreside of that castell
Twa unicorns sae bra' to see.
'There's the picture of a knight, and a ladye bright,
And the green hollin abune their bree.
There the Outlaw keepis five hundred men,
O gif they live not royallie!
'His merry men in ae livery clad,
O' the Lincoln green so fair to see;
He and his ladye in purple clad;
O! gif they live not royallie!
'He says yon forest is his ain,
He wan it from the Soudronie;
Sae as he wan it, sae will he keep it,
Contrair all kings in Christentie.'
'Gar ray my horse,' said the noble king,
'To Ettrick Forest hie will I me';
Then he gard graith five thousand men,
And sent them on for the forest free.
Then word is gane the Outlaw till,
In Ettrick Forest, where dwelleth he,
That the king was coming to his cuntrie,
To conquer baith his lands and he.
'I mak a vow,' the Outlaw said,
'I mak a vow, and that trulie,
Were there but three men to take my part
Yon king's coming full dear suld be.'
Then messengers he called forth,
And bade them haste them speedilie:
'Ane of you go to Halliday,
The laird of the Covehead is he.
'He certain is my sister's son;
Bid him come quick and succour me;
Tell Halliday with thee to come,
And show him a' the veritie.'
'What news, what news?' said Halliday,
'Man, frae thy master unto me?'
'Not as ye wad; seeking your aid;
The king's his mortal enemie.'
'Aye, by my troth,' quoth Halliday,
'Even for that it repenteth me;
For gif he lose fair Ettrick Forest,
He'll tak fair Moffatdale frae me.
'I'll meet him wi' five hundred men,
And surely mae, if mae may be.'
The Outlaw call'd a messenger,
And bid him hie him speedily.
'To Andrew Murray of Cockpool,
That man's a dear cousin to me;
Desire him come, and make me aid,
With all the power that he may be.
'The king has vow'd to cast my castle down,
And mak a widow of my gay ladye;
He'll hang my merry men pair by pair
In ony place where he may them see.'
'It stands me hard,' quoth Andrew Murray,
'Judge if it stands not hard with me;
To enter against a king with crown,
And put my lands in jeopardie!
'Yet gif I come not on the day,
Surely at night he sall me see.'
To Sir James Murray, laird of Traquair,
A message came right speedilie.
'What news, what news?' James Murray said,
'Man, frae thy master unto me?'
'What need I tell? for wel ye ken
The king's his mortal enemie.
'He desires ye'll come and make him aid,
With all the powers that ye may be.'
'And, by my troth,' James Murray said,
'With that Outlaw will I live and die;
'The king has gifted my lands lang syne,
It can not be nae war with me.'
...   ...   ...
...   ...   ...
The king was coming thro' Caddon Ford,
And fifteen thousand men was he;
They saw the forest them before,
They thought it awsome for to see.
Then spak the earl hight Hamilton,
And to the noble king said he,
'My sovereign prince, some counsel take,
First at your nobles, syne at me.
'Desire him meet thee at Penman's Core,
And bring four in his companie;
Five earls sall gang yoursell before,
Gude cause that you suld honour'd be.
'And, if he refuses to do that,
Wi' fire and sword we'll follow thee;
There sall never a Murray, after him,
Have land in Ettrick Forest free.'
The king then call'd a gentleman,
Royal banner-bearer then was he;
James Hope Pringle of Torsonse, by name:
He came and knelit upon his knee.
'Welcome, James Pringle of Torsonse!
Ye maun a message gae for me;
Ye maun gae to yon Outlaw Murray,
Surely where bauldly bideth he.
'Bid him meet me at Penman's Core,
And bring four of his companie;
Five earls sall come wi' mysel,
Gude reason I suld honour'd be.
'And if he refuses to do that,
Bid him look for nae good o' me;
There sall never a Murray after him
Have land in Ettrick Forest free.'
James came before the Outlaw keen,
And served him in his ain degree;
'Welcome, James Pringle of Torsonse!
What tidings frae the king to me?'
'He bids you meet him at Penman's Core,
And bring four of your companie;
Five earls will come with the king,
Mae mair in number will he be.
'And gif you refuse to do that,
I freely here upgive wi' thee,
There will never a Murray after thee
Have land in Ettrick Forest free.
'He'll cast your bonny castle down,
And make a widow of your gaye ladye,
He'll hang your merry men pair by pair
In ony place where he may them see.'
'It stands me hard,' the Outlaw said;
'Judge if it stands not hard with me;
I reck not of losing of mysell,
But all my offspring after me.
'Auld Halliday, young Halliday,
Ye sall be twa to gang wi' me;
Andrew Murray, and Sir James Murray,
We'll be nae mae in companie.'
When that they came before the king,
They fell befor him on their knee;
'Grant mercy, mercy, royal king!
E'en for His sake who died on tree.'
'Siecan like mercie sall ye have;
On gallows ye sall hangit be!'
'God forbid,' quo' the Outlaw then,
'I hope your grace will better be!'
'These lands of Ettrick Forest fair,
I wan them frae the enemie;
Like as I wan them, sae will I keep them,
Contrair all kings in Christentie.'
All the nobles said, the king about,
Pitie it were to see him die:
'Yet grant me mercy, sovereign prince,
Extend your favour unto me!
'I'll give you the keys of my castell,
With the blessing o' my fair ladye,
Mak me the sheriff of the forest,
And all my offspring after me.'
'Wilt thou give me the keys of thy castell,
With the blessing of thy fair ladye?
I'll mak thee sheriff of the Forest,
Surely while upwards grows the tree;
If you be not traitour to the king,
Forfaulted sall ye never be.'
'But, prince, what sall come o' my men?
When I go back, traitour they'll ca' me.
I had rather lose my life and land,
Ere my merry men rebuked me.'
'Will your merry men amend their lives?
And all their pardons I grant thee;
Now, name thy landes where'er they be,
And here I render them to thee.'
'Fair Philiphaugh, prince, is my ain,
I biggit it wi' lime and stane;
The Tinnies and the Hangingshaw,
My liege, are native steads of mine.
' ...   ...   ...
...   ...   ...
I have mony steads in the forest shaw,
But them by name I dinna knaw.'
The keys of the castle he gave the king,
With the blessing of his fair ladye;
He was made sheriff of Ettrick Forest,
Surely while upward grows the tree;
And if he was not traitour to the king,
Forfaulted he suld never be.
Wha ever heard, in ony times,
Siccan an outlaw in his degree
Sic favour get before a king
As did the Outlaw Murray of the forest free?
near Yair.
+The Text+ is taken from the Percy Folio MS., but the spelling is
modernised. There is another version, extant in broadsides to be found
in nearly all the large collections; this, when set beside the Folio MS.
text, provides a remarkable instance of the loss a ballad sustained by
falling into the hands of the broadside-printers. The present text,
despite the unlucky hiatus after st. 35, is a splendid example of an
English ballad, which cannot be earlier than the sixteenth century.
There is a fine rhythm throughout, and, as Child says, 'not many better
passages are met with in ballad poetry than that which tells of the
three gallant attempts on the mainmast tree (stt. 52-66).'
+The Story+ told in the ballad is a piece of history, and belongs
originally to the beginning of the sixteenth century. Andrew Barton was
one of three sons of John Barton, a Scots trader whose ship had been
plundered by the Portuguese in 1476; letters of reprisal were granted to
the brothers Barton, and renewed to them in 1506 'as no opportunity had
occurred of effectuating a retaliation.' It seems, however, that this
privilege was abused, at least by Andrew, who was reported in June 1511
to Henry VIII. as seizing English ships under the pretext that they were
Portuguese. The king did not send Lord Charles Howard, as the ballad
states--Lord Charles was not born till twenty-five years afterwards--but
Sir Thomas and Sir Edward Howard set out against the pirate by Henry's
leave. They took two ships, not one, the meeting with Henry Hunt
(st. 18) being the ballad-maker's invention. Lord Charles's fraudulent
use of the 'white flag' in st. 37 is supported by Bishop Lesley's
partisan account of the engagement, written _c._ 1570. The time-scheme
of the ballad is unusually vague: it begins 'in midsummer-time,' and the
punitive expedition starts on 'the day before midsummer even'--_i.e._
June 19, which agrees with the chronicles. The fight takes place within
the week; but Lord Charles does not get home until December 29 (st. 71).
Hall's chronicle says that they returned on August 2.
Lord Charles Howard was created Earl of Nottingham in 1596; but the
adoption of this into the ballad (st. 78) dates only our text. It is
quite probable that it existed in a previous version with names and
facts more correctly stated.
As it befell in midsummer-time,
When birds sing sweetly on every tree,
Our noble king, King Henry the Eighth,
Over the river of Thames passed he.
He was no sooner over the river,
Down in a forest to take the air,
But eighty merchants of London city
Came kneeling before King Henry there.
'O ye are welcome, rich merchants,
Good sailors, welcome unto me!'
They swore by the rood they were sailors good,
But rich merchants they could not be.
'To France nor Flanders dare we not pass,
Nor Bordeaux voyage we dare not fare,
And all for a false robber that lies on the seas,
And robs us of our merchant's-ware.'
King Henry was stout, and he turned him about,
And swore by the Lord that was mickle of might;
'I thought he had not been in the world throughout
That durst have wrought England such unright.'
But ever they sighed, and said, alas!
Unto King Henry this answer again;
'He is a proud Scot that will rob us all
If we were twenty ships and he but one.'
The king looked over his left shoulder,
Amongst his lords and barons so free;
'Have I never a lord in all my realm
Will fetch yond traitor unto me?'
'Yes, that dare I!' says my lord Charles Howard,
Near to the king whereas he did stand;
'If that your Grace will give me leave,
Myself will be the only man.'
'Thou shalt have six hundred men,' saith our king,
'And choose them out of my realm so free,
Besides mariners and boys,
To guide the great ship on the sea.'
'I'll go speak with Sir Andrew,' says Charles, my lord Howard,
'Upon the sea, if he be there;
I will bring him and his ship to shore,
Or before my prince I will never come near.'
The first of all my lord did call,
A noble gunner he was one;
This man was three score years and ten,
And Peter Simon was his name.
'Peter,' says he, 'I must sail to the sea,
To seek out an enemy; God be my speed!
Before all others I have chosen thee;
Of a hundred gunners thou'st be my head.'
'My lord,' says he, 'if you have chosen me
Of a hundred gunners to be the head,
Hang me at your main-mast tree
If I miss my mark past three pence bread.'
The next of all my lord he did call,
A noble bowman he was one;
In Yorkshire was this gentleman born,
And William Horsley was his name.
'Horsley,' says he, 'I must sail to the sea,
To seek out an enemy; God be my speed!
Before all others I have chosen thee;
Of a hundred bowmen thou'st be my head.'
'My lord,' says he, 'if you have chosen me
Of a hundred bowmen to be the head,
Hang me at your main-mast tree
If I miss my mark past twelve pence bread.'
With pikes, and guns, and bowmen bold,
This noble Howard is gone to the sea
On the day before mid-summer even,
And out at Thames' mouth sailed they.
They had not sailed days three
Upon their journey they took in hand,
But there they met with a noble ship,
And stoutly made it both stay and stand.
'Thou must tell me thy name,' says Charles, my lord Howard,
'Or who thou art, or from whence thou came,
Yea, and where thy dwelling is,
To whom and where thy ship does belong.'
'My name,' says he, 'is Harry Hunt,
With a pure heart and a penitent mind;
I and my ship they do belong
Unto the New-castle that stands upon Tyne.'
'Now thou must tell me, Harry Hunt,
As thou hast sailed by day and by night,
Hast thou not heard of a stout robber?
Men call him Sir Andrew Barton, knight.'
But ever he sighed and said, 'Alas!
Full well, my lord, I know that wight;
He robbed me of my merchant's-ware,
And I was his prisoner but yesternight.
'As I was sailing upon the sea,
And Bordeaux voyage as I did fare,
He clasped me to his arch-board,
And robbed me of all my merchant's-ware.
'And I am a man both poor and bare,
And every man will have his own of me,
And I am bound towards London to fare,
To complain to my prince Henry.'
'That shall not need,' says my lord Howard;
'If thou canst let me this robber see,
For every penny he hath taken thee fro,
Thou shalt be rewarded a shilling,' quoth he.
'Now God forfend,' says Henry Hunt,
'My lord, you should work so far amiss:
God keep you out of that traitor's hands!
For you wot full little what a man he is.
'He is brass within, and steel without,
And beams he bears in his top-castle strong;
His ship hath ordnance clean round about;
Besides, my lord, he is very well manned.
'He hath a pinnace is dearly dight,
Saint Andrew's cross, that is his guide;
His pinnace bears nine score men and more,
Besides fifteen cannons on every side.
'If you were twenty ships, and he but one,
Either in arch-board or in hall,
He would overcome you every one,
And if his beams they do down fall.'
'This is cold comfort,' says my lord Howard,
'To welcome a stranger thus to the sea;
I'll bring him and his ship to shore,
Or else into Scotland he shall carry me.'
'Then you must get a noble gunner, my lord,
That can set well with his eye,
And sink his pinnace into the sea,
And soon then overcome will he be.
'And when that you have done this,
If you chance Sir Andrew for to board,
Let no man to his top-castle go;
And I will give you a glass, my lord,
'And then you need to fear no Scot,
Whether you sail by day or by night;
And to-morrow, by seven of the clock,
You shall meet with Sir Andrew Barton, knight.
'I was his prisoner but yesternight,
And he hath taken me sworn,' quoth he;
'I trust my Lord God will me forgive
And if that oath then broken be.
'You must lend me six pieces, my lord,' quoth he,
'Into my ship, to sail the sea,
And to-morrow, by nine of the clock,
Your honour again then will I see.'
And the hatch-board where Sir Andrew lay
Is hatched with gold dearly dight:
'Now by my faith,' says Charles, my lord Howard,
'Then yonder Scot is a worthy wight!
'Take in your ancients and your standards,
Yea, that no man shall them see,
And put me forth a white willow wand.
As merchants use to sail the sea.'
But they stirred neither top nor mast,
But Sir Andrew they passed by.
'What English are yonder,' said Sir Andrew,
'That can so little courtesy?
'I have been admiral over the sea
More than these years three;
There is never an English dog, nor Portingale,
Can pass this way without leave of me.
'But now yonder pedlars they are past,
Which is no little grief to me;
Fetch them back,' says Sir Andrew Barton,
'They shall all hang at my mainmast tree.'
With that the pinnace it shot off,
That my lord Howard might it well ken;
It struck down my lord's foremast,
And killed fourteen of my lord his men.
'Come hither, Simon,' says my lord Howard,
'Look that thy words be true thou said;
I'll hang thee at my mainmast tree
If thou miss thy mark past twelve pence bread.'
Simon was old, but his heart it was bold;
He took down a piece, and laid it full low;
He put in chain yards nine,
Besides other great shot less and moe.
With that he let his gunshot go;
So well he settled it with his eye,
The first sight that Sir Andrew saw,
He saw his pinnace sunk in the sea.
When he saw his pinnace sunk,
Lord! in his heart he was not well.
'Cut my ropes, it is time to be gone;
I'll go fetch yond pedlars back myself!'
When my lord Howard saw Sir Andrew loose,
Lord! in his heart that he was fain.
'Strike on your drums, spread out your ancients;
Sound out your trumpets, sound out amain!'
'Fight on, my men,' says Sir Andrew Barton,
'Weet, howsoever this gear will sway,
It is my lord Admiral of England
Is come to seek me on the sea.'
Simon had a son; with shot of a gun,
Well Sir Andrew might it ken,
He shot it at a privy place,
And killed sixty more of Sir Andrew's men.
Harry Hunt came in at the other side,
And at Sir Andrew he shot then;
He drove down his foremast tree,
And killed eighty more of Sir Andrew's men.
'I have done a good turn,' says Harry Hunt,
'Sir Andrew is not our king's friend;
He hoped to have undone me yesternight,
But I hope I have quit him well in the end.'
'Ever alas!' said Sir Andrew Barton,
'What should a man either think or say?
Yonder false thief is my strongest enemy,
Who was my prisoner but yesterday.
'Come hither to me, thou Gordon good,
And be thou ready at my call,
And I will give thee three hundred pound
If thou wilt let my beams down fall.'
With that he swarved the mainmast tree,
So did he it with might and main;
Horsley, with a bearing arrow,
Strake the Gordon through the brain.
And he fell into the hatches again,
And sore of this wound that he did bleed;
Then word went through Sir Andrew's men
That the Gordon he was dead.
'Come hither to me, James Hamilton,
Thou art my sister's son, I have no more;
I will give thee six hundred pound
If thou will let my beams down fall.'
With that he swarved the mainmast tree,
So did he it with might and main;
Horsley, with another broad arrow,
Strake the yeoman through the brain.
That he fell down to the hatches again;
Sore of his wound that he did bleed.
Covetousness gets no gain,
It is very true as the Welshman said.
But when he saw his sister's son slain,
Lord! in his heart he was not well.
'Go fetch me down my armour of proof,
For I will to the top-castle myself.
'Go fetch me down my armour of proof,
For it is gilded with gold so clear;
God be with my brother, John of Barton!
Amongst the Portingales he did it wear.'
But when he had his armour of proof,
And on his body he had it on,
Every man that looked at him
Said, gun nor arrow he need fear none.
'Come hither, Horsley,' says my lord Howard,
'And look your shaft that it go right;
Shoot a good shoot in the time of need,
And for thy shooting thou'st be made a knight.'
'I'll do my best,' says Horsley then,
'Your honour shall see before I go;
If I should be hanged at your mainmast,
I have in my ship but arrows two.'
But at Sir Andrew he shot then;
He made sure to hit his mark;
Under the spole of his right arm
He smote Sir Andrew quite through the heart.
Yet from the tree he would not start,
But he clinged to it with might and main;
Under the collar then of his jack
He strake Sir Andrew through the brain.
'Fight on, my men,' says Sir Andrew Barton,
'I am hurt, but I am not slain;
I'll lay me down and bleed awhile,
And then I'll rise and fight again.
'Fight on, my men,' says Sir Andrew Barton,
'These English dogs they bite so low;
Fight on for Scotland and Saint Andrew
Till you hear my whistle blow!'
But when they could not hear his whistle blow,
Says Harry Hunt, 'I'll lay my head
You may board yonder noble ship, my lord,
For I know Sir Andrew he is dead.'
With that they boarded this noble ship,
So did they it with might and main;
They found eighteen score Scots alive,
Besides the rest were maimed and slain.
My lord Howard took a sword in his hand,
And smote off Sir Andrew's head;
The Scots stood by did weep and mourn,
But never a word durst speak or say.
He caused his body to be taken down,
And over the hatch-board cast into the sea,
And about his middle three hundred crowns:
'Wheresoever thou lands, it will bury thee.'
With his head they sailed into England again,
With right good will and force and main,
And the day before New Year's Even
Into Thames' mouth they came again.
My lord Howard wrote to King Henry's grace,
With all the news he could him bring:
'Such a New Year's gift I have brought to your Grace
As never did subject to any king.
'For merchandise and manhood,
The like is not to be found:
The sight of these would do you good,
For you have not the like in your English ground.'
But when he heard tell that they were come,
Full royally he welcomed them home;
Sir Andrew's ship was the king's New Year's gift;
A braver ship you never saw none.
Now hath our king Sir Andrew's ship,
Beset with pearls and precious stones;
Now hath England two ships of war--
Two ships of war, before but one.
'Who holp to this?' says King Henry,
'That I may reward him for his pain.'
'Harry Hunt, and Peter Simon,
William Horsley, and I the same.'
'Harry Hunt shall have his whistle and chain,
And all his jewels, whatsoever they be,
And other rich gifts that I will not name,
For his good service he hath done me.
'Horsley, right thou'st be a knight,
Lands and livings thou shalt have store;
Howard shall be Earl of Nottingham,
And so was never Howard before.
'Now Peter Simon, thou art old;
I will maintain thee and thy son;
Thou shalt have five hundred pound all in gold
For the good service that thou hast done.'
Then King Henry shifted his room.
In came the Queen and ladies bright;
Other errands had they none
But to see Sir Andrew Barton, knight.
But when they see his deadly face,
His eyes were hollow in his head;
'I would give a hundred pound,' says King Henry,
'The man were alive as he is dead!
'Yet for the manful part that he hath played,
Both here and beyond the sea,
His men shall have half a crown a day
To bring them to my brother, King Jamie.'
shooting, but see 56.3; and cf. _Adam Bell_, 150.3.
+The Text+ is from a copy taken down from North Devon tradition by the
Rev. S. Baring Gould, and printed by Child; since when other versions
have been found still in circulation in England. A Sussex version,
though perhaps derived from a Catnach broadside, is given in the
_Journal_ of the Folk-Song Society, vol. i. 162.
+The Story.+--This ballad is undoubtedly a degenerate version of the
preceding, _Sir Andrew Barton_, of which name, as Child says, Henry
Martyn would be no extraordinary corruption. It is given here as an
instance of the fate which awaits a popular ballad in the process of
being sung to pieces.
In merry Scotland, in merry Scotland
There lived brothers three;
They all did cast lots which of them should go
A robbing upon the salt sea.
The lot it fell on Henry Martyn,
The youngest of the three;
That he should go rob on the salt, salt sea
To maintain his brothers and he.
He had not a-sailed a long winter's night,
Nor yet a short winter's day,
Before that he met with a lofty old ship,
Come sailing along that way.
O when she came by Henry Martyn;
'I prithee now, let us go!'
'O no, God wot! that, that will I not,
O that will I never do.
'Stand off, stand off!' said Henry Martyn,
'For you shall not pass by me;
For I am a robber all on the salt seas,
To maintain us brothers three.
'How far, how far,' cries Henry Martyn,
'How far do you make it?' said he;
'For I am a robber all on the salt seas,
To maintain us brothers three.'
For three long hours they merrily fought,
For hours they fought full three;
At last a deep wound got Henry Martyn,
And down by the mast fell he.
'Twas broadside to a broadside then,
And a rain and hail of blows,
But the salt sea ran in, ran in, ran in,
To the bottom then she goes.
Bad news, bad news for old England,
Bad news has come to the town,
For a rich merchant's vessel is cast away,
And all her brave seamen drown.
Bad news, bad news through London Street,
Bad news has come to the king,
For all the brave lives of the mariners lost,
That are sunk in the watery main.
+The Text+ is from Ravenscroft's _Deuteromelia_ (1609), the only text
that has come down to us of a 'three-man's song' which achieved
extraordinary popularity during' the seventeenth century.
+The Story.+--'Good King John of France' is presumed to be John II., who
was taken prisoner at the battle of Poictiers and died in 1364. But the
earliest literary reference to this ballad occurs in the play of _Gammar
Gurton's Needle_, acted in 1566, where the song 'I cannot eat but little
meat' is to be sung 'to the tune of John Dory.' From Carew's _Survey of
Cornwall_ (1602) we learn a little more: 'Moreover, the prowess of one
three-man's song, namely, how he fought bravely at sea with John Dory
(a Genowey, as I conjecture), set forth by John, the French king, and,
after much bloodshed on both sides, took, and slew him, in revenge of
the great ravine and cruelty which he had fore committed upon the
Englishmen's goods and bodies.'
As it fell on a holy-day,
And upon a holy-tide-a,
John Dory bought him an ambling nag
To Paris for to ride-a.
And when John Dory to Paris was come,
A little before the gate-a,
John Dory was fitted, the porter was witted
To let him in thereat-a.
The first man that John Dory did meet
Was good king John of France-a;
John Dory could well of his courtesie,
But fell down in a trance-a.
'A pardon, a pardon, my liege and my king,
For my merry men and for me-a,
And all the churles in merry England,
I'll bring them all bound to thee-a.'
And Nicholl was then a Cornish man
A little beside Bohide-a,
And he manned forth a good black bark
With fifty good oars on a side-a.
'Run up, my boy, unto the main-top,
And look what thou canst spy-a.'
'Who ho, who ho! a goodly ship I do see;
I trow it be John Dory-a.'
They hoist their sails, both top and top,
The mizzen and all was tried-a,
And every man stood to his lot,
What ever should betide-a.
The roaring cannons then were plied,
And dub-a-dub went the drum-a;
The braying trumpets loud they cried
To courage both all and some-a.
The grappling-hooks were brought at length,
The brown bill and the sword-a;
John Dory at length, for all his strength,
Was clapped fast under board-a.
+The Text+ is from a broadside in the Bagford collection (i. 65); other
broadsides, very similar, are to be found in the Pepys, Roxburghe, and
other collections. The ballad has often been reprinted; and more than
one oral version has been recovered--much corrupted in transmission.
+The Story+ is apocryphal, as has been shown by research undertaken
since Child annotated the ballad; so also are other broadsides, _The
Seamen's Song of Captain Ward_ and _The Seamen's Song of Dansekar_,
which deal with Ward. He was a Kentish fisherman, born at Feversham
about 1555, who turned pirate after a short service aboard the _Lion's
Whelp_ man-of-war. The _Rainbow_ was the name of a ship then in the
navy, often mentioned in reports from 1587 onwards; but Professor Sir
J. K. Laughton has pointed out that she never fought with Ward. Possibly
_Rainbow_ is a corruption of _Tramontana_, a small cruiser which _may_
have chased him once in the Irish Channel. The fullest account of Ward
may be found in an article, unsigned, but written by Mr. John Masefield,
in the _Gentleman's Magazine_ for March, 1906, pp. 113-126.
Strike up, you lusty gallants,
With music and sound of drum,
For we have descried a rover
Upon the sea is come;
His name is Captain Ward,
Right well it doth appear,
There has not been such a rover
Found out this thousand year:
For he hath sent unto our King,
The sixth of January,
Desiring that he might come in
With all his company.
'And if your King will let me come
Till I my tale have told,
I will bestow for my ransom,
Full thirty ton of gold.'
'O nay, O nay,' then said our King,
'O nay, this may not be,
To yield to such a rover,
Myself will not agree:
He hath deceived the Frenchman,
Likewise the King of Spain,
And how can he be true to me,
That hath been false to twain?'
With that our King provided
A ship of worthy fame,
Rainbow is she called,
If you would know her name:
Now the gallant Rainbow
She rows upon the sea,
Five hundred gallant seamen
To bear her company.
The Dutchman and the Spaniard,
She made them for to fly,
Also the bonny Frenchman,
As she met him on the sea.
When as this gallant Rainbow
Did come where Ward did lie,
'Where is the captain of this ship?'
This gallant Rainbow did cry.
'O, that am I,' says Captain Ward,
'There's no man bids me lie,
And if thou art the King's fair ship,
Thou art welcome to me.'
'I'll tell thee what,' says Rainbow,
'Our King is in great grief,
That thou shouldst lie upon the sea,
And play the arrant thief,
'And will not let our merchants' ships
Pass as they did before;
Such tidings to our King is come,
Which grieves his heart full sore.'
With that, this gallant Rainbow
She shot, out of her pride,
Full fifty gallant brass pieces
Charged on every side.
And yet these gallant shooters
Prevailed not a pin,
Though they were brass on the outside,
Brave Ward was steel within;
Shoot on, shoot on,' says Captain Ward,
'Your sport well pleaseth me,
And he that first gives over,
Shall yield unto the sea.
'I never wronged an English ship,
But Turk and King of Spain,
For and the jovial Dutchman,
As I met on the main;
If I had known your King
But one-two years before,
I would have saved brave Essex life,
Whose death did grieve me sore.
'Go tell the King of England,
Go tell him thus from me,
If he reigns King of all the land,
I will reign King at sea.'
With that the gallant Rainbow shot,
And shot and shot in vain,
And left the rover's company,
And return'd home again.
'Our royal King of England,
Your ship's returned again,
For Ward's ship is so strong
It never will be ta'en.'
'O everlasting!' says our King,
'I have lost jewels three,
Which would have gone unto the seas
And brought proud Ward to me.
'The first was Lord Clifford,
Earl of Cumberland;
The second was the Lord Mountjoy
As you shall understand;
The third was brave Essex
From field would never flee,
Which would have gone unto the seas,
And brought proud Ward to me.'
+The Text+ is taken from a broadside in the Pepys collection (iv. 196),
which can be dated between 1682 and 1685, and is entitled _Sir Walter
Raleigh sailing in the Low-lands_. Three other copies of the same
edition of the broadside are known.
+The Story+ of the _Sweet Trinity_ has become confused with that of the
_Golden Vanity_ (_Golden Victorie_, _Golden Trinitie_, _Gold Pinnatree_
are variants), which is probably a corrupted form of it; indeed the weak
ending of the broadside challenges any singer to improve upon it. But
again there are two distinct variations of the _Golden Vanity_ ballad.
In the first class, the boy, having sunk the French galley, calls to the
_Golden Vanity_ to throw him a rope, and when it is refused, threatens
to sink her too; whereupon they take him aboard and carry out all their
promises of reward (which vary considerably in the different versions).
In the second class, the boy dies after he is taken up from the water;
in one version he sinks from exhaustion before he can be saved.
The _Sweet Trinity_, however, has been taken by a ship of unspecified
nationality ('false' might easily become corrupted into 'French'); and
thus this ballad deals with three ships, while the _Golden Vanity_
versions mention but two. The latter are still current in folk-song.
Sir Walter Raleigh has built a ship,
_In the Netherlands_;
Sir Walter Raleigh has built a ship,
_In the Netherlands_;
And it is called the Sweet Trinity,
And was taken by the false gallaly.
_Sailing in the Lowlands_.
'Is there never a Seaman bold
_In the Netherlands_;
Is there never a Seaman bold
_In the Netherlands_;
That will go take this false gallaly,
And to redeem the Sweet Trinity?
_Sailing in the Lowlands_.
Then spoke the little Ship-boy,
_In the Netherlands_;
Then spoke the little Ship-boy,
_In the Netherlands_;
'Master, master, what will you give me,
And I will take this false gallaly,
And release the Sweet Trinity?
_Sailing in the Lowlands_.
'I'll give thee gold, and I'll give thee fee,
_In the Netherlands_;
I'll give thee gold, and I'll give thee fee,
_In the Netherlands_;
And my eldest daughter, thy wife shall be.
_Sailing in the Lowlands_.'
He set his breast, and away he did swim,
Until he came to the false gallaly.
He had an augur fit for the nonce,
The which will bore fifteen good holes at once.
Some were at cards, and some at dice,
Until the salt water flashed in their eyes.
Some cut their hats, and some cut their caps,
For to stop the salt water gaps.
He set his breast, and away did swim,
Until he came to his own ship again.
'I have done the work I promised to do,
I have sunk the false gallaly,
And released the Sweet Trinity.
'You promised me gold, and you promised me fee,
Your eldest daughter my wife she must be.'
'You shall have gold, and you shall have fee,
But my eldest daughter your wife shall never be.'
'Then fare you well, you cozening Lord,
Seeing you are not so good as your word.'
And thus I shall conclude my song,
_Of the sailing in the Lowlands_,
Wishing all happiness to all seamen both old and young,
_In their sailing in the Lowlands_.
water; but see _Glossary of Ballad Commonplaces_, First Series,
Page
Adam Bell, Clym of the Clough and William
of Cloudesly                                         147
Captain Ward and the Rainbow                           219
Gest of Robyn Hode, A                                    1
Henry Martyn                                           213
John Dory                                              216
Johnny o' Cockley's Well                               177
Outlaw Murray, The                                     183
Robin and Gandeleyn                                     92
Robin Hood and Guy of Gisborne                         128
Robin Hood and the Monk                                 96
Robin Hood and the Potter                              113
Robin Hood's Death                                     140
Sir Andrew Barton                                      196
Sweet Trinity, The                                     224
Page
As it befell in midsummer-time                         197
As it fell on a holy-day                               216
Ettrick Forest is a fair forest                        183
I heard a carping of a clerk                            92
In merry Scotland, in merry Scotland                   213
In summer, when the leaves spring                      113
In summer, when the shaws be sheen                      96
I will never eat nor drink, Robin Hood said            141
Johnny he has risen up i' the morn                     178
Lythe and listin, gentilmen                              6
Mery it was in grene forest                            148
Sir Walter Raleigh has built a ship                    225
Strike up, you lusty gallants                          219
Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to His Majesty at the
Edinburgh University Press
Selected and Edited by FRANK SIDGWICK
Ballads of Romance and Chivalry. 1903.
'It forms an excellent introduction to a sadly neglected source of
poetry.' --_Athenaeum._
'There can be nothing but praise for the selection, editing, and notes,
which are all excellent and adequate. It is, in fine, a valuable volume
of what bids fair to be a very valuable series.' --_Academy._
'The most serviceable edition of the ballads yet published in England.'
--_Manchester Guardian._
Ballads of Mystery and Miracle and Fyttes of Mirth. 1904.
'It includes many beautiful and well-known ballads, and no pains have
been spared by the editor in producing them, so far as may be, in their
entirety.' --_World._
'The second volume . . . carries out the promise of the first. . . .
Even after Professor Kittredge's compressed edition of Child, . . .
Mr. Sidgwick's work abundantly justifies its existence.' --_Manchester
Guardian._
Ballads of Scottish Tradition and Romance. 1906.
'This book is as good a model of fine and careful editing as the two
earlier volumes. . . . Mr. Sidgwick's selections could not be bettered,
nor could he have arranged them more attractively.' --_Manchester
Guardian._
'There can be no doubt that when the series is completed it will be the
best cheap and popular and representative collection.' --_Bookman._
+EARLY ENGLISH LYRICS: Amorous, Divine, Moral, and Trivial+. Chosen by
E. K. CHAMBERS and F. SIDGWICK. Fcap. 8vo. 6s. net.
lyrical poetry earlier than the advent of the Sonnet with Wyatt and
Surrey during the sixteenth century. It includes 152 poems, ranging
between 1225 and 1550 A.D., an essay on _Some Aspects of Mediaeval Lyric_
by E. K. CHAMBERS, and full notes.
'It is a work of true scholarship as well as of distinguished literary
skill.' --_Manchester Guardian._
'A pleasant, scholarly, well-conceived book.' --_The Bookman._
+THE FOOTPATH WAY: An Anthology for Walkers+. With an Introduction by
'That delightful anthology.' --_Evening News._
+IDEALS OF LIVING: An Anthology of Thoughts Concerning the Meaning and
Purpose of Life+. Selected and edited by GRACE E. HADOW.
'A charming and interesting anthology.' --_Spectator._
+AN EASTER ANTHOLOGY.+ Selected and edited by WILLIAM KNIGHT, Emeritus
Professor of Philosophy, St. Andrews.
'A most helpful gift.' --_Evening Standard._
+MINIATURES: being Nature Essays+. By G. A. B. DEWAR.
'We commend these little sketches to all who love and reverence Nature
and the occupations of the soil.' --_Pall Mall Gazette._
+HISTORICAL VIGNETTES.+ By BERNARD CAPES.
_The above Books, uniform in size, design, and price. Fcap. 8vo, Cloth,
gilt. 2s. 6d. net each._
+THE OXFORD GARLAND: An Anthology of Prose and Verse in Praise of
Oxford+. Chosen by OONA H. BALL. With a Photogravure Frontispiece after
J. W. KING. Square 8vo. 2s. 6d. net.
SIDGWICK & JACKSON, Ltd., 3 Adam St., London, W.C.
Errata (noted by transcriber)
INTRODUCTION: Topography
A GEST OF ROBYN HODE: Fifth Fytte