The songs, to savage virtue dear,
That won of yore the public ear,
Ere Polity, sedate and sage,
Had quench'd the fires of feudal rage.--WARTON.
=Printed by James Ballantyne and Co.=
On a Visit paid to the Ruins of Melrose Abbey
by the Countess of Dalkeith, and her Son, Lord
King Easter has courted her for her lands,
King Wester for her fee;
King Honour for her comely face,
And for her fair bodie.
They had not been four months married,
As I have heard them tell,
Until the nobles of the land
Against them did rebel.
And kevils them between;
And they cast kevils them amang,
Wha suld gae kill the king.
O some said yea, and some said nay,
Their words did not agree;
Till up and got him, Fause Foodrage,
And swore it suld be he.
When bells were rung, and mass was sung,
And a' men bound to bed,
King Honour and his gaye ladye
In a hie chamber were laid.
Then up and raise him, Fause Foodrage,
When a' were fast asleep,
And slew the porter in his lodge,
That watch and ward did keep.
O four and twenty silver keys
Hang hie upon a pin;
And aye, as ae door he did unlock,
He has fastened it him behind.
Then up and raise him, King Honour,
Says--"What means a' this din?
"Or what's the matter, Fause Foodrage,
"Or wha has loot you in?"
"O ye my errand weel sall learn,
"Before that I depart."
Then drew a knife, baith lang and sharp,
And pierced him to the heart.
Then up and got the queen hersell,
And fell low down on her knee:
"O spare my life, now, Fause Foodrage!
"For I never injured thee.
"O spare my life, now, Fause Foodrage,
"Until I lighter be!
"And see gin it be lad or lass,
"King Honour has left me wi'."
"O gin it be a lass," he says,
"Weel nursed it sall be;
"But gin it be a lad bairn,
"He sall be hanged hie.
"I winna spare for his tender age,
"Nor yet for his hie hie kin;
"But soon as e'er he born is,
"He sall mount the gallows pin."
O four and twenty valiant knights
Were set the queen to guard;
And four stood aye at her bour door,
To keep both watch and ward.
But when the time drew near an end,
That she suld lighter be,
She cast about to find a wile,
To set her body free.
O she has birled these merry young men
With the ale but and the wine,
Until they were as deadly drunk
As any wild wood swine.
"O narrow, narrow, is this window,
"And big, big, am I grown!"
Yet, through the might of Our Ladye,
Out at it she has gone.
She wandered up, she wandered down,
She wandered out and in;
And, at last, into the very swine's stythe,
The queen brought forth a son.
Then they cast kevils them amang,
Which suld gae seek the queen;
And the kevil fell upon Wise William,
And he sent his wife for him.
O when she saw Wise William's wife,
The queen fell on her knee;
"Win up, win up, madame!" she says:
"What needs this courtesie?"
"O out o' this I winna rise,
"Till a boon ye grant to me;
"To change your lass for this lad bairn,
"King Honour left me wi'.
"And ye maun learn my gay goss hawk
"Right weel to breast a steed;
"As weel to write and read.
"And ye maun learn my gay goss hawk
"To wield baith bow and brand;
"And I sall learn your turtle dow
"At kirk and market when we meet,
"We'll dare make nae avowe,
"But--'Dame, how does my gay goss hawk?'
"Madame, how does my dow?"
When days were gane, and years came on,
Wise William he thought lang;
And he has ta'en King Honour's son
A hunting for to gang.
It sae fell out, at this hunting,
Upon a simmer's day,
That they came by a fair castell,
Stood on a sunny brae.
"O dinna ye see that bonny castell,
"Wi' halls and towers sae fair?
"Gin ilka man had back his ain,
"Of it ye suld be heir."
"How I suld be heir of that castell,
"In sooth I canna see;
"For it belangs to Fause Foodrage,
"And he is na kin to me."
"O gin ye suld kill him, Fause Foodrage,
"You would do but what was right;
"For I wot he kill'd your father dear,
"Or ever ye saw the light.
"And gin ye suld kill him, Fause Foodrage,
"There is no man durst you blame;
"For he keeps your mother a prisoner,
"And she darna take ye hame."
The boy stared wild like a gray goss hawk:
Says--"What may a' this mean?"
"My boy, ye are King Honour's son,
"And your mother's our lawful queen."
"O gin I be king Honour's son,
"By Our Ladye I swear,
"This night I will that traitor slay,
"And relieve my mother dear!"
He has set his bent bow to his breast,
And leaped the castell wa';
And soon he has seized on Fause Foodrage,
Wha loud for help 'gan ca'.
"O haud your tongue, now, Fause Foodrage!
"Frae me ye shanna flee."
Syne pierc'd him thro' the fause fause heart,
And set his mother free.
And he has rewarded Wise William
Wi' the best half of his land;
And sae has he the turtle dow,
Wi' the truth o' his right hand.
_King Easter has courted her for her lands,_
_King Wester for her fee;_
_King Honour, &c._--P. 4. v. 1.
King Easter and King Wester were probably the petty princes of
Northumberland and Westmoreland. In the _Complaynt of Scotland_, an
ancient romance is mentioned, under the title, "_How the king of
Estmureland married the king's daughter of Westmureland_," which may
possibly be the original of the beautiful legend of _King Estmere_,
in the _Reliques of Ancient English Poetry_, Vol. I. p. 62 4th edit.
From this it may be conjectured, with some degree of plausibility,
that the independent kingdoms of the east and west coast were, at an
early period, thus denominated, according to the Saxon mode of naming
districts, from their relative positions; as Essex, Wessex, Sussex. But
the geography of the metrical romances sets all system at defiance;
and in some of these, as _Clariodus_ and _Meliades_, Estmureland
undoubtedly signifies the land of the Easterlings, or the Flemish
provinces at which vessels arrived in three days from England, and to
which they are represented as exporting wool.--_Vide Notes on the Tale
of Kempion._ On this subject I have, since publication of the first
edition, been favoured with the following remarks by Mr Ritson, in
opposition to the opinion above expressed:--
"Estmureland and Westmureland have no sort of relation to
Northumberland and Westmoreland. The former was never called
Eastmoreland, nor were there ever any kings of Westmoreland; unless we
admit the authority of an old rhyme, cited by Usher:--
"Here the king Westmer
"Slow the king Rothinger."
"There is, likewise, a 'king Estmere, of Spain,' in one of Percy's
ballads.
"In the old metrical romance of _Kyng Horn_, or _Horn Child_, we
find both Westnesse and Estnesse; and it is somewhat singular, that
two places, so called, actually exist in Yorkshire at this day. But
_ness_, in that quarter, is the name given to an inlet from a river.
There is, however, great confusion in this poem, as _Horn_ is called
king sometimes of one country, and sometimes of the other. In the
French original, Westir is said to have been the old name of Hirland,
or Ireland; which, occasionally at least, is called Westnesse, in the
translation, in which Britain is named Sudene; but here, again, it is
inconsistent and confused.
"It is, at any rate, highly probable, that the story, cited in the
_Complaynt of Scotland_, was a romance of _King Horn_, whether prose
or verse; and, consequently, that Estmureland and Westmureland should
there mean England and Ireland; though it is possible that no other
instance can be found of those two names occurring with the same sense."
_And they cast kevils them amang._--P. 4. v. 3.
_Kevils_--Lots. Both words originally meant only a portion, or share,
of any thing.--_Leges Burgorum_, cap. 59, _de lot, cut, or kavil_.
_Statuta Gildae_, cap. 20. _Nullus emat lanam, &c. nisi fuerit confrater
Gildae, &c._ _Neque_ lot _neque_ cavil _habeat cum aliquo confratre
nostro._ In both these laws, _lot_ and _cavil_ signify a share in trade.
_Dame, how does my gay goss hawk?_--P. 9. v. 1.
This metaphorical language was customary among the northern nations.
In 925, king Adelstein sent an embassy to Harald Harfagar, king of
Norway, the chief of which presented that prince with an elegant
sword, ornamented with precious stones. As it was presented by the
point, the Norwegian chief, in receiving it, unwarily laid hold of
the hilt. The English ambassador declared, in the name of his master,
that he accepted the act as a deed of homage; for, touching the hilt
of a warrior's sword was regarded as an acknowledgement of subjection.
The Norwegian prince, resolving to circumvent his rival by a similar
artifice, suppressed his resentment, and sent, next summer, an embassy
to Adelstein, the chief of which presented Haco, the son of Harald, to
the English prince; and, placing him on his knees, made the following
declaration:--"_Haraldus, Normannorum rex, amice te salutat;_ albamque
_hunc avem, bene institutam mittit, utque melius deinceps erudias,
postulat._" The king received young Haco on his knees; which the
Norwegian ambassador immediately accepted, in the name of his master,
as a declaration of inferiority; according to the proverb, "_Is minor
semper habetur, qui alterius filium educat._"--Pontoppidani Vestigia
Danor. Vol. II. p. 67.
The tale of _Kempion_ seems, from the names of the personages, and the
nature of the adventure, to have been an old metrical romance, degraded
into a ballad, by the lapse of time, and the corruption of reciters.
The change in the structure of the last verses, from the common ballad
stanza, to that which is proper to the metrical romance, adds force to
this conjecture.
Such transformations, as the song narrates, are common in the annals
of chivalry. In the 25th and 26th cantos of the second book of the
_Orlando Inamorato_, the paladin, _Brandimarte_, after surmounting
many obstacles, penetrates into the recesses of an enchanted palace.
Here he finds a fair damsel, seated upon a tomb, who announces to
him, that, in order to achieve her deliverance, he must raise the
lid of the sepulchre, and kiss whatever being should issue forth.
The knight, having pledged his faith, proceeds to open the tomb, out
of which a monstrous snake issues forth, with a tremendous hiss.
_Brandimarte_, with much reluctance, fulfils the _bizarre_ conditions
of the adventure; and the monster is instantly changed into a beautiful
Fairy, who loads her deliverer with benefits. For the satisfaction of
those, who may wish to compare the tale of the Italian poet with that
There is a ballad, somewhat resembling _Kempion_, called the _Laidley
Worm of Spindleston-heuch_, which is very popular upon the borders;
but, having been often published, it was thought unnecessary to insert
it in this collection. The most common version was either entirely
composed, or re-written, by the Reverend Mr Lamb, of Norham.
A similar tradition is, by Heywood and Delrio, said to have existed
at Basil. A tailor, in an adventurous mood, chose to descend into an
obscure cavern, in the vicinity of the city. After many windings, he
came to an iron door, through which he passed into a splendid chamber.
Here he found, seated upon a stately throne, a lady, whose countenance
was surprisingly beautiful, but whose shape terminated in a dragon's
train, which wrapped around the chair on which she was placed. Before
her stood a brazen chest, trebly barred and bolted; at each end of
which lay couched a huge black ban-dog, who rose up, as if to tear
the intruder in pieces. But the lady appeased them; and, opening the
chest, displayed an immense treasure, out of which she bestowed upon
the visitor some small pieces of money, informing him, that she was
enchanted by her step-dame, but should recover her natural shape, on
being kissed thrice by a mortal. The tailor assayed to fulfil the
conditions of the adventure; but her face assumed such an altered,
wild, and grim expression, that his courage failed, and he was fain to
fly from the place. A kinsman of his, some years after, penetrated into
the cavern, with the purpose of repairing a desperate fortune. But,
finding nothing but dead men's bones, he ran mad, and died. Sir John
Mandeville tells a similar story of a Grecian island.
There are numerous traditions, upon the borders, concerning huge
and destructive snakes, and also of a poisonous reptile called a
_man-keeper_; although the common adder, and blind worm, are the only
reptiles of that _genus_ now known to haunt our wilds. Whether it be
possible, that, at an early period, before the country was drained,
and cleared of wood, serpents of a larger size may have existed, is
a question which the editor leaves to the naturalist. But, not to
mention the fabulous dragon, slain in Northumberland by _Sir Bevis_,
the fame still survives of many a _preux chevalier_, supposed to have
distinguished himself by similar atchievements.
The manor of Sockburne, in the bishopric of Durham, anciently the
seat of the family of Conyers, or Cogniers, is held of the bishop by
the service of presenting, or showing to him, upon his first entrance
into his diocese, an antique sword, or faulchion. The origin of this
peculiar service is thus stated in Beckwith's edition of _Blount's
Ancient Tenures_, p. 200.
"Sir Edward Blackett (the proprietor of the manor) now represents the
person of Sir John Conyers, who, as tradition says, in the fields of
Sockburne, slew, with this faulchion, a monstrous creature, a dragon,
a worm, or flying serpent, that devoured men, women, and children. The
then owner of Sockburne, as a reward for his bravery, gave him the
manor, with its appurtenances, to hold for ever, on condition that he
meets the lord bishop of Durham, with this faulchion, on his first
entrance into his diocese, after his election to that see.
"And, in confirmation of this tradition, there is painted, in a window
of Sockburne church, the faulchion we just now spoke of: and it is also
cut in marble, upon the tomb of the great ancestor of the Conyers',
together with a dog, and the monstrous worm, or serpent, lying at his
feet, of his own killing, of which the history of the family gives the
above account.
"When the bishop first comes into his diocese, he crosses the river
Tees, either at the ford at Nesham, or Croft-bridge, where the counties
of York and Durham divide; at one of which places Sir Edward Blackett,
either in person, or by his representative, if the bishop comes by
Nesham, rides into the middle of the river Tees, with the ancient
faulchion drawn in his hand, or upon the middle of Croft-bridge; and
then presents the faulchion to the bishop, addressing him in the
ancient form of words; upon which the bishop takes the faulchion into
his hand, looks at it, and returns it back again, wishing the lord of
the manor his health, and the enjoyment of his estate." The faulchion,
above alluded to, has upon its hilt the arms of England, in the reign
of King John, and an eagle, supposed to be the ensign of Morcar, earl
of Northumberland.--GOUGH'S _Camden's Britannia_, Vol. III. p. 114. Mr
Gough, with great appearance of probability, conjectures, the dragon,
engraved on the tomb, to be an emblematical, or heraldric ornament.
The property, called Pollard's Lands, near Bishop Auckland, is held
by a similar tenure; and we are informed, in the work just quoted,
that "Dr Johnson of Newcastle met the present bishop, Dr Egerton, in
September, 1771, at his first arrival there, and presented a faulchion
upon his knee, and addressed him in the old form of words, saying,
"_My lord, in behalf of myself, as well as of the several other
tenants of Pollard's Lands, I do humbly present your lordship with
this faulchion, at your first coming here, wherewith, as the tradition
goeth, Pollard slew of old a great and venomous serpent, which did much
harm to man and beast: and, by the performance of this service, these
lands are holden._"--Ancient Tenures, p. 201.
Above the south entrance of the ancient parish church of Linton, in
Roxburghshire, is a rude piece of sculpture, representing a knight,
with a falcon on his arm, encountering with his lance, in full
career, a sort of monster, which the common people call a _worm_, or
snake. Tradition bears, that this animal inhabited a den, or hollow,
at some distance from the church, whence it was wont to issue forth,
and ravage the country, or, by the fascination of its eyes and breath,
draw its prey into its jaws. Large rewards were in vain offered for
the destruction of this monster, which had grown to so huge a bulk,
that it used to twist itself, in spiral folds, round a green hillock
of considerable height, still called Wormeston, and marked by a clump
of trees. When sleeping in this place, with its mouth open, popular
credulity affirms, that it was slain by the laird of Lariston, a man,
brave even to madness, who, coming upon the snake at full gallop,
thrust down its throat a _peat_ (a piece of turf dried for fuel), dipt
in scalding pitch, and fixed to the point of his lance. The aromatic
quality of the peat is said to have preserved the champion from the
effects of the monster's poisonous breath, while, at the same time,
it clogged its jaws. In dying, the serpent contracted his folds with
so much violence, that their spiral impression is still discernible
round the hillock where it lay. The noble family of Somerville are
said to be descended from this adventurous knight, in memory of whose
atchievement, they bear a dragon as their crest.
The sculpture itself gives no countenance to this fine story; for
the animal, whom the knight appears to be in the act of slaying, has
no resemblance to a serpent, but rather to a wolf, or boar, with
which the neighbouring Cheviot mountains must in early times have
species, attacking the horse of the champion. An inscription, which
might have thrown light upon this exploit, is now totally defaced. The
vulgar, adapting it to their own tradition, tell us that it ran thus:
The wode laird of Lariestoun
Slew the wode worm of Wormiestoune,
And wan all Linton paroschine.
It is most probable, that the animal, destroyed by the ancestor of Lord
Somerville, was one of those beasts of prey, by which Caledonia was
formerly infested; but which, now,
Razed out of all her woods, as trophies hung,
Grin high emblazon'd on her children's shields.
Since publishing the first edition of this work, I have found the
following account of Somerville's atchievement, in a MS. of some
antiquity:
"John Somerville (son to Roger de Somerville, baron of Whichenever,
in Staffordshire) was made, by King William (the Lion), his principal
falconer, and got from that king the lands and baronie of Linton, in
Tiviotdale, for an extraordinarie and valiant action; which, according
to the manuscript of the family of Drum, was thus: In the parochen of
Lintoun, within the sheriffdom of Roxburgh, there happened to breed a
monster, in form of a serpent, or worme; in length, three Scots yards,
and somewhat bigger than an ordinarie man's leg, with a head more
proportionable to its length than greatness. It had its den in a hollow
piece of ground, a mile south-east from Lintoun church; it destroyed
both men and beast that came in its way. Several attempts were made to
destroy it, by shooting of arrows, and throwing of darts, none daring
to approach so near as to make use of a sword or lance. John Somerville
undertakes to kill it, and being well mounted, and attended with a
stout servant, he cam, before the sun-rising, before the dragon's den,
having prepared some long, small, and hard peats (bog-turf dried for
fuel), be-dabbed with pitch, rosette, and brimstone, fixed with small
wire upon a wheel, at the point of his lance: these, being touched
with fire, would instantly break out into flames; and, there being
a breath of air, that served to his purpose, about the sun-rising,
the serpent, dragon, or worme, so called by tradition, appeared with
her head, and some part of her body, without the den; whereupon his
servant set fire to the peats upon the wheel, at the top of the lance,
and John Somerville, advancing with a full gallop, thrust the same with
the wheel, and a great part of the lance, directly into the serpent's
mouthe, which wente down its throat, into the belly, and was left
there, the lance breaking by the rebounding of the horse, and giving a
deadly wound to the dragoun; for which action he was knighted by King
William; and his effigies was cut in ston in the posture he performed
this actione, and placed above the principal church door of Lintoun,
where it is yet to be seen, with his name and sirname: and the place,
where this monster was killed, is at this day called, by the common
people, who have the foresaid story by tradition, the Wormes Glen. And
further to perpetuate this actione, the barons of Lintoun, Cowthally,
and Drum, did always carry for crest, a wheel, and thereon a dragoun."
Extracted from a genealogical MS. in the Advocates' Library, written
about 1680. The falcon on the champion's arm, in the monument, may be
supposed to allude to his office of falconer to William of Scotland.
The ballad of _Kempion_ is given chiefly from Mrs Brown's MS., with
corrections from a recited fragment.
"Cum heir, cum heir, ye freely feed,
"And lay your head low on my knee;
"The heaviest weird I will you read,
"That ever was read to gaye ladye.
"O meikle dolour sall ye dree,
"And aye the salt seas o'er ye'se swim;
"And far mair dolour sall ye dree
"On Estmere crags, when ye them climb.
"I weird ye to a fiery beast,
"And relieved sall ye never be,
"Till Kempion, the kingis son,
"Cum to the crag, and thrice kiss thee."
O meikle dolour did she dree,
And aye the salt seas o'er she swam;
And far mair dolour did she dree
On Estmere crags, e'er she them clamb.
And aye she cried for Kempion,
Gin he would but cum to her hand:
Now word has gane to Kempion,
That sicken a beast was in his land.
"Now, by my sooth," said Kempion,
"This fiery beast I'll gang and see."
"And, by my sooth," said Segramour,
"My ae brother, I'll gang wi' thee."
Then bigged hae they a bonny boat,
And they hae set her to the sea;
But a mile before they reached the shore,
Around them she gar'd the red fire flee.
"O Segramour, keep the boat afloat,
"And lat her na the land o'er near;
"For this wicked beast will sure gae mad,
"And set fire to a' the land and mair."
Syne has he bent an arblast bow,
And aim'd an arrow at her head;
And swore if she didna quit the land,
Wi' that same shaft to shoot her dead.
"O out of my stythe I winna rise,
"(And it is not for the awe o' thee)
"Till Kempion, the kingis son,
"Cum to the crag, and thrice kiss me."
He has louted him o'er the dizzy crag,
And gien the monster kisses ane:
Awa she gaed, and again she cam,
The fieryest beast that ever was seen.
"O out o' my stythe I winna rise,
"(And not for a' thy bow nor thee)
"Till Kempion, the kingis son,
"Cum to the crag, and thrice kiss me."
He's louted him o'er the Estmere crags,
And he has gien her kisses twa:
Awa she gaed, and again she cam,
The fieryest beast that ever you saw.
"O out of my den I winna rise,
"Nor flee it for the fear o' thee,
"Till Kempion, that courteous knight,
"Cum to the crag, and thrice kiss me."
He's louted him o'er the lofty crag,
And he has gien her kisses three:
Awa she gaed, and again she cam,
The loveliest ladye e'er could be!
"And by my sooth," says Kempion,
"My ain true love (for this is she)
"They surely had a heart o' stane,
"Could put thee to such misery.
"O was it warwolf in the wood?
"Or was it mermaid in the sea?
"Or was it man, or vile woman,
"My ain true love, that mishaped thee?"
"It was na warwolf in the wood,
"Nor was it mermaid in the sea;
"But it was my wicked step-mother,
"And wae and weary may she be!"
"Than ever fell on vile woman;
"Her hair shall grow rough, and her teeth grow lang,
"And on her four feet shall she gang.
"None shall take pity her upon;
"In Wormeswood she aye shall won;
"And relieved shall she never be,
And sighing said that weary wight,
"I doubt that day I'll never see!"
_On Estmere crags, when ye them climb._--P. 26. v. 2.
If by Estmere crags we are to understand the rocky cliffs of
Northumberland, in opposition to Westmoreland, we may bring our scene
of action near Bamborough, and thereby almost identify the tale of
_Kempion_ with that of the _Laidley Worm of Spindleston_, to which it
bears so strong a resemblance.
_I weird ye to a fiery beast._--P. 26. v. 3.
Our ideas of dragons and serpents are probably derived from the
Scandinavians. The legends of _Regnar Lodbrog_, and of the huge snake
in the Edda, by whose folds the world is encircled, are well known.
Griffins and dragons were fabled, by the Danes, as watching over, and
defending, hoards of gold.--_Bartholin. de caus. cont. mortis_, p. 490.
_Saxo Grammaticus_, lib. 2. The Edda also mentions one Fafner, who,
transformed into a serpent, brooded over his hidden treasures. From
these authorities, and that of Herodotus, our Milton draws his simile--
As when a Gryphon, through the wilderness,
With winged course, o'er hill or moory dale,
Pursues the Arimaspian, who, by stealth,
Had from his wakeful custody purloin'd
The guarded gold.
_O was it warwolf in the wood?_--P. 29. v. 4.
Warwolf, or Lycanthropus, signifies a magician, possessing the power
of transforming himself into a wolf, for the purpose of ravage and
devastation. It is probable the word was first used symbolically, to
distinguish those, who, by means of intoxicating herbs, could work
their passions into a frantic state, and throw themselves upon their
enemies with the fury and temerity of ravenous wolves. Such were
the noted _Berserker_ of the Scandinavians, who, in their fits of
voluntary frenzy, were wont to perform the most astonishing exploits
of strength, and to perpetrate the most horrible excesses, although,
in their natural state, they neither were capable of greater crimes
nor exertions than ordinary men. This quality they ascribed to Odin.
"_Odinus efficere valuit, ut hostes ipsius inter bellandum caeci vel
surdi vel attoniti fierent, armaque illorum instar baculorum obtusa
essent. Sui vero milites sine loricis incedebant, ac instar_ canum vel
luporum furebant, _scuta sua arrodentes: et robusti ut ursi vel tauri,
adversarios trucidabant: ipsis vero neque ignis neque ferrum nocuit.
Ea qualitas vocatur furor Berserkicus."--Snorro Sturleson,_ quoted by
_Bartholin. de causis contemptae mortis_, p. 344. For a fuller account
of these frantic champions, see the _Hervorar Saga_ published by Suhm;
also the _Christni Saga_, and most of the ancient Norwegian histories
and romances. Camden explains the tales of the Irish, concerning men
transformed into wolves, upon nearly the same principle.--GOUGH'S
_edition of Camden's Britannia_, Vol. III. p. 520.
But, in process of time, the transformation into a wolf was believed
to be real, and to affect the body as well as the mind; and to such
transformations our faithful Gervase of Tilbury bears evidence, as an
eye-witness. "_Vidimus frequenter in Anglia per lunationes homines
in lupos mutari, quod hominum genus Gerulfos Galli vocunt, Angli
vero_ WER-WLF _dicunt._ WER _enim Anglice virum sonat,_ WLF _lupum."
Ot. Imp. De oculis apertis post peccatum._ The learned commentators,
upon the art of sorcery, differ widely concerning the manner in
which the arch fiend effects this change upon the persons of his
vassals; whether by surrounding their bodies with a sort of pellice
of condensed air, having the form of an wolf; or whether by some
delusion, affecting the eyes of the spectators; or, finally, by an
actual corporeal transformation. The curious reader may consult _Delrii
Disquisitiones Magicae_, p. 188; and (if he pleases) Evvichius _de
natura Sagarum_.--Fincelius, _lib. 2. de Mirac._--Remigius. _lib. 2.
de Daemonolat._--Binsfeld. _de confession, maleficarum_. Not to mention
Spondanus, Bodinus, Peucerus, Philippus Camerarius, Condronchus, Petrus
Thyraeus, Bartholomeus Spineus, Sir George Mackenzie, and King James I.,
with the sapient Monsieur Oufle of Bayle. The editor presumes, it is
only since the extirpation of wolves, that our British sorceresses have
adopted the disguise of hares, cats, and such more familiar animals.
A wild story of a warwolf, or rather a war-bear, is told in Torfoeus'
History of Hrolfe Kraka. As the original is a scarce book, little known
in this country, some readers may be interested by a short analysis of
the tale.
Hringo, king of Upland, had an only son, called Biorno, the most
beautiful and most gallant of the Norwegian youth. At an advanced
period of life, the king became enamoured of a "_witch lady_," whom
he chose for his second wife. A mutual and tender affection had, from
infancy, subsisted betwixt Biorno, and Bera, the lovely daughter of an
ancient warrior. But the new queen cast upon her step-son an eye of
incestuous passion; to gratify which, she prevailed upon her husband,
when he set out upon one of those piratical expeditions, which formed
the summer campaign of a Scandinavian monarch, to leave the prince at
home. In the absence of Hringo, she communicated to Biorno her impure
affection, and was repulsed with disdain and violence. The rage of the
weird step-mother was boundless. "Hence to the woods!" she exclaimed,
striking the prince with a glove of wolf-skin; "Hence to the woods!
subsist only on thy father's herds; live pursuing, and die pursued!"
From this time the prince Biorno was no more seen, and the herdsmen
of the king's cattle soon observed, that astonishing devastation was
nightly made among their flocks, by a black bear, of immense size,
and unusual ferocity. Every attempt to snare or destroy this animal
was found vain; and much was the unavailing regret for the absence of
Biorno, whose delight had been in extirpating beasts of prey. Bera,
the faithful mistress of the young prince, added her tears to the
sorrow of the people. As she was indulging her melancholy, apart from
society, she was alarmed by the approach of the monstrous bear, which
was the dread of the whole country. Unable to escape, she waited its
approach, in expectation of instant death; when, to her astonishment,
the animal fawned upon her, rolled himself at her feet, and regarded
her with eyes, in which, spite of the horrible transformation, she
still recognized the glances of her lost lover. Bera had the courage
to follow the bear to his cavern, where, during certain hours, the
spell permitted him to resume his human shape. Her love overcame her
repugnance at so strange a mode of life, and she continued to inhabit
the cavern of Biorno, enjoying his society during the periods of
his freedom from enchantment. One day, looking sadly upon his wife,
"Bera," said the prince, "the end of my life approaches. My flesh
will soon serve for the repast of my father and his courtiers. But,
do thou beware lest either the threats or entreaties of my diabolical
step-mother induce thee to partake of the horrid banquet. So shalt
thou safely bring forth three sons, who shall be the wonder of the
North." The spell now operated, and the unfortunate prince sallied
from his cavern to prowl among the herds. Bera followed him, weeping,
and at a distance. The clamour of the chace was now heard. It was the
old king, who, returned from his piratical excursion, had collected a
strong force to destroy the devouring animal which ravaged his country.
The poor bear defended himself gallantly, slaying many dogs, and some
huntsmen. At length, wearied out, he sought protection at the feet of
his father. But his supplicating gestures were in vain, and the eyes
of paternal affection proved more dull than those of love. Biorno died
by the lance of his father, and his flesh was prepared for the royal
banquet. Bera was recognised, and hurried into the queen's presence.
The sorceress, as Biorno had predicted, endeavoured to prevail upon
Bera to eat of what was then esteemed a regal dainty. Entreaties and
threats being in vain, force was, by the queen's command, employed
for this purpose, and Bera was compelled to swallow one morsel of
the bear's flesh. A second was put into her mouth, but she had an
opportunity of putting it aside. She was then dismissed to her father's
house. Here, in process of time, she was delivered of three sons, two
of whom were affected variously, in person and disposition, by the
share their mother had been compelled to take in the feast of the
king. The eldest, from his middle downwards, resembled an elk, whence
he derived the name of Elgfrod. He proved a man of uncommon strength,
but of savage manners, and adopted the profession of a robber. Thorer,
the second son of Bera, was handsome and well shaped, saving that
he had the foot of a dog; from which he obtained the appellation of
Houndsfoot. But Bodvar, the third son, was a model of perfection in
mind and body. He revenged upon the necromantic queen the death of his
father, and became the most celebrated champion of his age.
_Historia Hrolfi Krakae, Haffniae, 1715._
Poich' ebbe il verso Brandimarte letto,
La lapida pesante in aria alzava:
Ecco fuor una serpe insin' al petto,
La qual, forte stridendo, zufolava,
Di spaventoso, e terribil' aspetto,
A prendo il muso gran denti mostrava,
De' quali il cavalier non si fidando,
Si trasse a dietro, et mise mano al brando.
Ma quella Donna gridava "non fate"
Col viso smorto, e grido tremebondo,
"Non far, che ci farai pericolare,
E cadrem' tutti quanti nel profondo:
A te convien quella serpe baciare,
O far pensier di non esser' al Mondo,
Accostar la tua bocca con la sua,
O perduta tener la vita tua."
"Come? non vedi, che i denti degrigna,
Che pajon fatti a posta a spiccar' nasi,
E fammi un certo viso de matrigna,"
Disse il Guerrier, "ch'io me spavento quassi."
"Anzi t' invita con faccia benigna;"
Disse la Donna, "e molti altri rimasi
Per vilta sono a questa sepolture:
Or la t' accosta, e non aver paura."
Il cavalier s' accosta, ma di passo,
Che troppo grato quel baciar non gli era,
Verso la serpe chinandosi basso,
Gli parvo tanto orrenda, e tanto fera,
Che venne in viso freddo, com' un sasso;
E disse "si fortuna vuol' ch'io pera,
Fia tanto un altra volta, quanto addeso
Ma cagion dar non me ne voglio io stesso."
"Fuss' io certo d'andare in paradiso,
Come son' certo, chinandomi un poco,
Che quella bestia mi s'avvento al viso,
E mi piglia nel naso, o altro loco:
Egli e proprio cosi, com' io m'avviso,
Ch' altri ch'io stato e colto a questo gioco,
E che costei mi da questo conforto
Cosi dicendo, a rinculare attende,
Deliberato piu non s'accostare:
La Donna si dispera, e lo reprende,
"Ah codardo," dicea, "che credi fare?
Perche tanta vilta, l'alma t'offende,
Che ti fara alla fin mal capitare?
Infinita paura e poca fede,
La salute gli mostro, e non mi crede."
Punto il Guerrier de questi agre parole,
Torna de nuovo ver la sepoltura,
Tinsegli in rose il color de viole,
In vergogna mutata la paura:
Pur stando ancor' fra due, vuole, e non vuole,
Un pensier lo spaventa, un l'assicura
Al fin tra l'animoso, e'l disperato,
A lei s'accosta, ed halle un bacio dato.
Un ghiaccio proprio gli parse a toccare
La bocca, che parea prima di foco:
La serpe se commincia a tramutare
E diventa donzella a poco a poco:
Febosilla costei si fa chiamare,
Un fata, che fece quel bel loco,
E quel giardino, e quella sepoltura,
Ove gran tempo e stato in pena dura, &c.
incantato._
Weardale, in the bishopric of Durham. From the following votive
inscription, it appears to have been erected by C. T. V. Micianus,
a Roman general, upon taking an immense boar, which none of his
predecessors could destroy:
"_Silvano invicto sacrum. C. Tetius Veturius Micianus Praef.
Alae Sebosinae ob aprum eximiae formae captum, quem multi
antecessores ejus praedari non potuerunt, Votum solvens lubenter
possuit._"
LAMB'S Notes on Battle of Flodden, 1774, p. 67.
This ballad is now, for the first time, published in a perfect state. A
fragment, comprehending the 2d, 4th, 5th, and 6th verses, as also the
taken from the recitation of an old woman, residing near Kirkhill, in
West Lothian; the same from whom were obtained the variations in the
tale of _Tamlane_, and the fragment of the _Wife of Usher's Well_,
which is the next in order.
The tale is much the same with the Breton romance, called _Lay le
Frain_, or the _Song of the Ash_. Indeed, the editor is convinced,
that the farther our researches are extended, the more we shall see
ground to believe, that the romantic ballads of later times are, for
the most part, abridgments of the ancient metrical romances, narrated
in a smoother stanza, and more modern language. A copy of the ancient
romance, alluded to, is preserved in the invaluable collection (W. 4.
We redeth oft and findeth ywrite
And this clerkes wele it wite
Layes that ben in harping
Ben yfound of ferli thing
Sum beth of wer and sum of wo
Sum of joye and mirthe also
And sum of trecherie and of gile
Of old aventours that fel while
And sum of bourdes and ribaudy
And many ther beth of faery
Of al thinges that men seth
Maist o' love forsoth yai beth
In Breteyne bi hold time
This layes were wrought so seithe this rime
When kinges might our y here
Of ani mervailes that ther wer
They token a harp in glee and game
And maked a lay and gaf it name
Now of this aventours that weren y falle
Y can tel sum ac nought alle
Ac herkeneth Lordinges sothe to sain
I chil you tel _Lay le Frain_
Bifel a cas in Breteyne
Whereof was made Lay le Frain
In Ingliche for to tellen y wis
Of ane asche forsothe it is
On ane ensammple fair with alle
That sum time was bi falle &c.
"Its narrow, narrow, make your bed,
"And learn to lie your lane;
"For I'm ga'n o'er the sea, Fair Annie,
"A braw bride to bring hame.
"Wi' her I will get gowd and gear;
"Wi' you I ne'er got nane.
"But wha will bake my bridal bread,
"Or brew my bridal ale?
"And wha will welcome my brisk bride,
"That I bring o'er the dale?"
"Its I will bake your bridal bread,
"And brew your bridal ale;
"And I will welcome your brisk bride,
"That you bring o'er the dale."
"But she that welcomes my brisk bride,
"Maun gang like maiden fair;
"She maun lace on her robe sae jimp,
"And braid her yellow hair."
"But how can I gang maiden-like,
"When maiden I am nane?
"Have I not borne seven sons to thee,
"And am with child again?"
She's ta'en her young son in her arms,
Another in her hand;
And she's up to the highest tower,
To see him come to land.
"Come up, come up, my eldest son,
"And look o'er yon sea-strand,
"And see your father's new-come bride,
"Before she come to land."
"Come down, come down, my mother dear!
"Come frae the castle-wa'!
"I fear, if langer ye stand there,
"Ye'll let yoursell down fa'."
And she gaed down, and farther down,
Her love's ship for to see;
And the top-mast and the main-mast
Shone like the silver free.
And she's gane down, and farther down,
The bride's ship to behold;
And the top-mast and the main-mast
They shone just like the gold.
She's ta'en her seven sons in her hand;
I wot she didna fail!
She met Lord Thomas and his bride,
As they cam o'er the dale.
"You're welcome to your house, Lord Thomas;
"You're welcome to your land;
"You're welcome, with your fair ladye,
"That you lead by the hand.
"You're welcome to your ha's, ladye;
"You're welcome to your bowers;
"You're welcome to your hame, ladye:
"For a' that's here is yours."
"I thank thee, Annie; I thank thee, Annie;
"Sae dearly as I thank thee;
"You're the likest to my sister, Annie,
"That ever I did see.
"There came a knight out o'er the sea,
"And steal'd my sister away;
"And land where'er he gae!"
She hang ae napkin at the door,
Another in the ha';
And a' to wipe the trickling tears,
Sae fast as they did fa'.
And aye she served the lang tables,
With white bread and with wine;
And aye she drank the wan water,
And aye she served the lang tables,
With white bread and with brown;
And aye she turned her round about,
Sae fast the tears fall down.
And he's ta'en down the silk napkin,
Hung on a silver pin;
And aye he wipes the tear trickling
Adown her cheik and chin.
And aye he turned him round about,
And smil'd amang his men:
Says--"Like ye best the old ladye,
"Or her that's new come hame?"
When bells were rung, and mass was sung,
And a' men bound to bed,
Lord Thomas and his new-come bride,
To their chamber they were gaed.
Annie made her bed a little forebye,
To hear what they might say;
"And ever alas!" fair Annie cried,
"That I should see this day!
"Gin my seven sons were seven young rats,
"Running on the castle-wa',
"And I were a grey cat mysell!
"I soon would worry them a'.
"Gin my seven sons were seven young hares,
"Running o'er yon lilly lee,
"And I were a grew hound mysell!
"Soon worried they a' should be."
And wae and sad fair Annie sat,
And drearie was her sang;
And ever, as she sobb'd and grat,
"Wae to the man that did the wrang!"
"My gown is on," said the new-come bride,
"My shoes are on my feet,
"And I will to fair Annie's chamber,
"And see what gars her greet.
"What ails ye, what ails ye, Fair Annie,
"That ye make sic a moan?
"Has your wine barrels cast the girds,
"Or is your white bread gone?
"O wha was't was your father, Annie,
"Or wha was't was your mother?
"And had ye ony sister, Annie,
"Or had ye ony brother?"
"The Earl of Wemyss was my father,
"The Countess of Wemyss my mother;
"And a' the folk about the house,
"To me were sister and brother."
"If the Earl of Wemyss was your father,
"I wot sae was he mine;
"And it shall not be for lack o' gowd,
"That ye your love sall tyne.
"For I have seven ships o' mine ain,
"A' loaded to the brim;
"And I will gie them a' to thee,
"Wi' four to thine eldest son.
"But thanks to a' the powers in heaven,
"That I gae maiden hame!"
There lived a wife at Usher's Well,
And a wealthy wife was she;
She had three stout and stalwart sons,
And sent them o'er the sea.
They hadna been a week from her,
A week but barely ane,
Whan word came to the carline wife,
That her three sons were gane.
They hadna been a week from her,
A week but barely three,
Whan word came to the carline wife,
That her sons she'd never see.
"I wish the wind may never cease,
"Nor fishes in the flood,
"Till my three sons come hame to me,
"In earthly flesh and blood!"
It fell about the Martinmass,
Whan nights are lang and mirk,
The carline wife's three sons came hame,
And their hats were o' the birk.
It neither grew in syke nor ditch,
Nor yet in ony sheugh;
But at the gates o' Paradise,
That birk grew fair eneugh.
"Blow up the fire, my maidens!
"Bring water from the well!
"For a' my house shall feast this night,
"Since my three sons are well."
And she has made to them a bed,
She's made it large and wide;
And she's ta'en her mantle her about,
Sat down at the bed-side.
Up then crew the red red cock,
And up and crew the gray;
The eldest to the youngest said,
"'Tis time we were away."
The cock he hadna craw'd but once,
And clapp'd his wings at a',
Whan the youngest to the eldest said,
"Brother, we must awa.
"The cock doth craw, the day doth daw,
"Gin we be mist out o' our place,
"A sair pain we maun bide.
"Fare ye weel, my mother dear!
"Fareweel to barn and byre!
"And fare ye weel, the bonny lass,
"That kindles my mother's fire."
_I wish the wind may never cease, &c._--P. 46. v. 2.
The sense of this verse is obscure, owing, probably, to corruption
by reciters. It would appear, that the mother had sinned in the same
degree with the celebrated _Lenore_.
_And their hats were o' the birk._--P. 46. v. 3.
The notion, that the souls of the blessed wear garlands, seems to be
of Jewish origin. At least, in the _Maase-book_, there is a Rabbinical
tradition, to the following effect:--
"It fell out, that a Jew, whose name was Ponim, an ancient man, whose
business was altogether about the dead, coming to the door of the
school, saw one standing there, who had a garland upon his head. Then
was Rabbi Ponim afraid, imagining it was a spirit. Whereupon he, whom
the Rabbi saw, called out to him, saying, 'Be not afraid, but pass
forward. Dost thou not know me?' Then said Rabbi Ponim, 'Art not thou
he whom I buried yesterday?' And he was answered, 'Yea, I am he.'
Upon which Rabbi Ponim said, 'Why comest thou hither? How fareth it
with thee in the other world?' And the apparition made answer, 'It
goeth well with me, and I am in high esteem in paradise.' Then said
the Rabbi, 'Thou wert but looked upon in the world as an insignificant
Jew. What good work didst thou do, that thou art thus esteemed?' The
apparition answered, 'I will tell thee: the reason of the esteem I am
in, is, that I rose every morning early, and with fervency uttered my
prayer, and offered the grace from the bottom of my heart: for which
reason I now pronounce grace in paradise, and am well respected. If
thou doubtest whether I am the person, I will show thee a token that
shall convince thee of it. Yesterday, when thou didst clothe me in my
funeral attire, thou didst tear my sleeve.' Then asked Rabbi Ponim,
'What is the meaning of that garland?' The apparition answered, 'I wear
it, to the end the wind of the world may not have power over me; for it
consists of excellent herbs of paradise.' Then did Rabbi Ponim mend the
sleeve of the deceased: for the deceased had said, that if it was not
mended, he should be ashamed to be seen amongst others, whose apparel
was whole. And then the apparition vanished. Wherefore, let every one
utter his prayer with fervency; for then it shall go well with him
in the other world. And let care be taken that no rent, nor tearing,
be left in the apparel in which the deceased are interred."--_Jewish
Traditions, abridged from Buxtorf_, London, 1732, Vol. II. p. 19.
_Gin we be mist out o' our place,_
_A sair pain we maun bide._--P. 48. v. 1.
This will remind the German reader of the comic adieu of a heavenly
apparition:--
Doch sieh! man schliesst die himmels thuer
Adieu! der himmlische Portier
Ist streng und haelt auf ordnung.
_Blumauer._
_A copy of this Ballad, materially different from that which follows,
appeared in_ "Scottish Songs," _2 vols. Edinburgh, 1792, under the
title of_ Lord Bothwell. _Some stanzas have been transferred from
thence to the present copy, which is taken down from the recitation
of a Lady, nearly related to the Editor. Some readings have been also
adopted from a third copy, in Mrs_ BROWN'S _MS., under the title of_
Child Brenton. _Cospatrick_ (Comes Patricius) _was the designation of
the Earl of Dunbar, in the days of_ WALLACE _and_ BRUCE.
Cospatrick has sent o'er the faem;
Cospatrick brought his ladye hame;
And fourscore ships have come her wi',
The ladye by the grene-wood tree.
There were twal' and twal' wi' baken bread,
And twal' and twal' wi' gowd sae reid,
And twal' and twal' wi' bouted flour,
And twal' and twal' wi' the paramour.
Sweet Willy was a widow's son,
And at her stirrup he did run;
And she was clad in the finest pall,
But aye she let the tears down fall.
"O is your saddle set awrye?
"Or rides your steed for you owre high?
"Or are you mourning, in your tide,
"That you suld be Cospatrick's bride?"
"I am not mourning, at this tide,
"That I suld be Cospatrick's bride;
"But I am sorrowing, in my mood,
"That I suld leave my mother good.
"But, gentle boy, come tell to me,
"What is the custom of thy countrie?"
"The custom thereof, my dame," he says,
"Will ill a gentle ladye please.
"Seven king's daughters has our lord wedded,
"And seven king's daughters has our lord bedded;
"But he's cutted their breasts frae their breast-bane,
"And sent them mourning hame again.
"Yet, gin you're sure that you're a maid,
"Ye may gae safely to his bed;
"But gif o' that ye be na sure,
"Then hire some damsell o' your bour."
The ladye's called her bour maiden,
That waiting was into her train;
"Five thousand merks I'll gie to thee,
"To sleep this night with my lord for me."
When bells were rung, and mass was sayne,
And a' men unto bed were gane,
Cospatrick and the bonny maid,
Into ae chamber they were laid.
"Now, speak to me, blankets, and speak to me, bed,
"And speak, thou sheet, enchanted web;
"And speak up, my bonny brown sword, that winna lie,
"Is this a true maiden that lies by me?"
"It is not a maid that you hae wedded,
"But it is a maid that you hae bedded;
"It is a leal maiden that lies by thee,
"But not the maiden that it should be."
O wrathful he left the bed,
And wrathfully his claiths on did;
And he has ta'en him through the ha',
And on his mother he did ca'.
"I am the most unhappy man,
"That ever was in christen land!
"I courted a maiden, meik and mild,
"And I hae gotten naething but a woman wi' child."
"O stay, my son, into this ha',
"And sport ye wi' your merrymen a';
"And I will to the secret bour,
"To see how it fares wi' your paramour."
The carline she was stark and sture,
She aff the hinges dang the dure;
"O is your bairn to laird or loun,
"Or is it to your father's groom?"
"O! hear me, mother, on my knee,
"Till my sad story I tell thee:
"O we were sisters, sisters seven,
"We were the fairest under heaven.
"It fell on a summer's afternoon,
"When a' our toilsome task was done,
"We cast the kevils us amang,
"To see which suld to the grene-wood gang.
"O hon! alas, for I was youngest,
"And aye my weird it was the hardest!
"The kevil it on me did fa',
"Whilk was the cause of a' my woe,
"For to the grene-wood I maun gae,
"To pu' the red rose and the slae;
"To pu' the red rose and the thyme,
"To deck my mother's bour and mine.
"I hadna pu'd a flower but ane,
"When by there came a gallant hende,
"Wi' high coll'd hose and laigh coll'd shoon,
"And he seemed to be sum king's son.
"And be I maid, or be I nae,
"He kept me there till the close o' day;
"And be I maid, or be I nane,
"He kept me there till the day was done.
"He gae me a lock o' his yellow hair,
"And bade me keep it ever mair;
"And bade me keep it against my needs.
"He gae to me a gay gold ring,
"And bade me keep it abune a' thing."
"What did ye wi' the tokens rare,
"That ye gat frae that gallant there?"
"O bring that coffer unto me,
"And a' the tokens ye sall see."
"Now stay, daughter, your bour within,
"While I gae parley wi' my son."
O she has ta'en her thro' the ha',
And on her son began to ca';
"What did you wi' the bonny beads,
"I bade ye keep against your needs?
"What did you wi' the gay gold ring,
"I bade ye keep abune a' thing?"
"I gae them to a ladye gay,
"I met in grene-wood on a day.
"But I wad gie a' my halls and tours,
"I had that ladye within my bours;
"But I wad gie my very life,
"I had that ladye to my wife."
"Now keep, my son, your ha's and tours;
"Ye have that bright burd in your bours:
"And keep, my son, your very life;
"Ye have that lady to your wife."
Now, or a month was cum and gane,
The ladye bore a bonny son;
And 'twas weel written on his breast bane,
"Cospatrick is my father's name."
O row my ladye in satin and silk,
And wash my son in the morning milk.
"She threw away her rings and _carknet_ cleen."--Harrison's
Translation of _Orlando Furioso--Notes on book 37th._
Prince Robert has wedded a gay ladye,
He has wedded her with a ring;
Prince Robert has wedded a gay ladye,
But he darna bring her hame.
"Your blessing, your blessing, my mother dear!
"Your blessing now grant to me!"
"Instead of a blessing ye sall have my curse,
"And you'll get nae blessing frae me."
She has called upon her waiting maid,
To fill a glass of wine;
She has called upon her fause steward,
To put rank poison in.
And to her roudes chin;
She has put it to her fause fause mouth,
But the never a drap gaed in.
He has put it to his bonny mouth,
And to his bonny chin,
He's put it to his cherry lip,
And sae fast the rank poison ran in.
"O ye hae poisoned your ae son, mother,
"Your ae son and your heir;
O ye hae poisoned your ae son, mother,
"And sons you'll never hae mair.
"O where will I get a little boy,
"That will win hose and shoon,
To run sae fast to Darlinton,
"And bid fair Eleanor come?"
Then up and spake a little boy,
That wad win hose and shoon,--
"O I'll away to Darlinton,
"And bid fair Eleanor come."
O he has run to Darlinton,
And tirled at the pin;
And wha was sae ready as Eleanor's sell
To let the bonny boy in.
"Your gude-mother has made ye a rare dinour,
"She's made it baith gude and fine;
"Your gude-mother has made ye a gay dinour,
"And ye maun cum till her and dine."
Its twenty lang miles to Sillertoun town,
The langest that ever were gane;
But the steed it was wight, and the ladye was light,
But when she cam to Sillertoun town,
And into Sillertoun ha',
The torches were burning, the ladies were mourning,
And they were weeping a'.
"O where is now my wedded lord,
"And where now can he be?
"O where is now my wedded lord?
"For him I canna see."
"Your wedded lord is dead," she says,
"And just gane to be laid in the clay;
"Your wedded lord is dead," she says,
"And just gane to be buried the day.
"Ye'se get nane o' his gowd, ye'se get nane o' his gear,
"Ye'se get nae thing frae me;
"Ye'se no get an inch o' his gude broad land,
"Tho' your heart suld burst in three."
"I want nane o' his gowd, I want nane o' his gear,
"I want nae land frae thee;
"But I'll hae the ring that's on his finger,
"For them he did promise to me."
"Ye'se no get the ring that's on his finger,
"Ye'se no get them frae me;
"Ye'se no get the ring that's on his finger,
"An' your heart suld burst in three."
She's turned her back unto the wa',
And her face unto a rock;
And there, before the mother's face,
Her very heart it broke.
The tane was buried in Mary's kirk,
The tother in Marie's quair;
And out o' the tane there sprang a birk,
And out o' the tother a brier.
And thae twa met, and thae twa plat,
The birk but and the brier;
And by that ye may very weel ken
derived from some old metrical romance, since we find the idea occur in
the conclusion of the voluminous history of Sir Tristrem. "_Ores veitil
que de la tumbe Tristan yssoit une belle ronce verte et feuilleue, qui
alloit par la chapelle, et descendoit le bout de la ronce sur la tumbe
d'Ysseult et entroit dedans._" This marvellous plant was three times
cut down; but, continues Rusticien de Puise, "_Le lendemain estoit
aussi belle comme elle avoit cy-devant ete, et ce miracle etoit sur
Tristan et sur Ysseult a tout jamais advenir_."
This ballad is edited from the MS. of Mrs Brown, corrected by a recited
fragment. A modernized copy has been published, under the title of
"Courteous King Jamie."--_Tales of Wonder_, Vol. II. p. 451.
The legend will remind the reader of the "Marriage of Sir Gawain," in
the _Reliques of Ancient Poetry_, and of the "Wife of Bath's Tale,"
in Father Chaucer. But the original, as appears from the following
quotation from Torfoeus, is to be found in an Icelandic Saga:
"_Hellgius, Rex Daniae, moerore ob amissam conjugem vexatus, solus
agebat, et subducens se hominum commercio, segregem domum, omnis
famulitii impatiens, incolebat. Accidit autem, ut nocte concubia,
lamentabilis cujusdam ante fores ejulantis sonus auribus ejus
obreperet. Expergefactus igitur, recluso ostio, informe quoddam
mulieris simulacrum,_ "_habitu corporis foedum, veste squalore
obsita, pallore, macie frigorisque tyrannide prope modum peremptum,
deprehendit; quod precibus obsecratus, ut qui jam miserorum aerumnas ex
propria calamitate pensare didicisset, in domum intromisit; ipse lectum
petit. At mulier, ne hac quidem benignitate contenta, thori consortium
obnixe flagitabat, addens id tanti referre, ut nisi impetraret, omnino
sibi moriendum esset. Quod, ea lege, ne ipsum attingeret, concessum
est. Ideo nec complexu eam dignatus rex, avertit sese. Cum autem prima
luce forte oculos ultro citroque converteret, eximiae formae virginem
lecto receptam animadvertit; quae statim ipsi placere coepit: causam
igitur tam repentinae mutationis curiosius indaganti, respondit virgo,
se unam e subterraneorum hominum genere diris novercalibus devotam,
tam tetra et execrabili specie, quali primo comparuit, damnatam,
quoad thori cujusdam principis socia fieret, multos reges hac de re
sollicitasse. Jam actis pro praestito beneficio gratiis, discessum
maturans, a rege formae ejus illecebris capto comprimitur. Deinde petit,
si prolem ex hoc congressu progigni contigerit, sequente hyeme, eodem
anni tempore, ante fores positam in aedes reciperet, seque ejus patrem
profiteri non gravaretur, secus non leve infortunium insecuturum
praedixit: a quo praecepto cum rex postea exorbitasset, nec prae foribus
jacentem infantem pro suo agnoscere voluisset, ad eum iterum, sed
corrugata fronte, accessit, obque violatam fidem acrius objurgatum
ab imminente periculo, praestiti olim beneficii gratia, exempturam
pollicebatur, ita tamen ut tota ultionis rabies in filium ejus_
"_effusa graves aliquando levitatis illius paenas exigeret. Ex hac
tam dissimilium naturarum commixtione, Skulda, versuti et versatilis
animi mulier, nata fuisse memoratur; quae utramque naturam participans
prodigiosorum operum effectrix perhibetur._"--Hrolffi Krakii, Hist. p.
Let never a man a wooing wend,
That lacketh thingis thrie:
A rowth o' gold, an open heart,
And fu' o' courtesey.
And this was seen o' King Henrie,
For he lay burd alane;
And he has ta'en him to a haunted hunt's ha',
Was seven miles frae a toun.
He's chaced the dun deer thro' the wood,
And the roe doun by the den,
Till the fattest buck, in a' the herd,
King Henrie he has slain.
He's ta'en him to his hunting ha',
For to make burly cheir;
When loud the wind was heard to sound,
And an earthquake rocked the floor.
And darkness cover'd a' the hall,
Where they sat at their meat:
The gray dogs, youling, left their food,
And crept to Henrie's feet.
And louder houled the rising wind,
And burst the fast'ned door;
And in there came a griesly ghost,
Stood stamping on the floor.
Her head touched the roof-tree of the house;
Her middle ye weel mot span:
Each frighted huntsman fled the ha',
And left the king alone.
Her teeth were a' like tether stakes,
Her nose like club or mell;
And I ken naething she appeared to be,
But the fiend that wons in hell.
"Sum meat, sum meat, ye King Henrie!
"Sum meat ye gie to me!"
"And what meat's in this house, ladye,
"O ye'se gae kill your berry-brown steed,
"And serve him up to me."
O when he killed his berry-brown steed,
Wow gin his heart was sair!
She eat him a' up, skin and bane,
Left naething but hide and hair.
"Mair meat, mair meat, ye King Henrie!
"Mair meat ye gie to me!"
"And what meat's i' this house, ladye,
"That ye're na wellcum tee?"
"O ye do slay your gude gray houndes,
"And bring them a' to me."
O when he slew his gude gray houndes,
Wow but his heart was sair!
She's ate them a' up, ane by ane,
Left naething but hide and hair.
"Mair meat, mair meat, ye King Henrie!
"Mair meat ye gie to me!"
"And what meat's i' this house, ladye,
"That I hae left to gie?"
"O ye do fell your gay goss-hawks,
"And bring them a' to me."
O when he felled his gay goss-hawks,
Wow but his heart was sair!
She's ate them a' up, bane by bane,
Left naething but feathers bare.
"Some drink, some drink, ye King Henrie!
"Sum drink ye gie to me!"
"And what drink's in this house, ladye,
"That ye're na wellcum tee?"
"O ye sew up your horse's hide,
"And bring in a drink to me."
O he has sewed up the bluidy hide,
And put in a pipe of wine;
She drank it a' up at ae draught,
Left na a drap therein.
"A bed, a bed, ye King Henrie!
"A bed ye mak to me!"
"And what's the bed i' this house, ladye,
"That ye're na wellcum tee?"
"O ye maun pu' the green heather,
"And mak a bed to me."
O pu'd has he the heather green,
And made to her a bed;
And up he has ta'en his gay mantle,
And o'er it he has spread.
"Now swear, now swear, ye King Henrie,
"To take me for your bride!"
"O God forbid," King Henrie said,
"That e'er the like betide!
"That e'er the fiend, that wons in hell,
"Should streak down by my side."
When day was come, and night was gane,
And the sun shone through the ha',
The fairest ladye, that e'er was seen,
Lay atween him and the wa'.
"O weel is me!" King Henrie said,
"How lang will this last wi' me?"
And out and spak that ladye fair,
"E'en till the day ye die.
"For I was witched to a ghastly shape,
"All by my stepdame's skill,
"Till I should meet wi' a courteous knight,
"Wad gie me a' my will."
The following verses are the original words of the tune of "_Allan
Water_," by which name the song is mentioned in Ramsay's _Tea Table
Miscellany_. The ballad is given from tradition; and it is said, that
a bridge, over the Annan, was built in consequence of the melancholy
catastrophe which it narrates. Two verses are added in this edition,
from another copy of the ballad, in which the conclusion proves
fortunate. By the _Gatehope Slack_, is perhaps meant the _Gate Slack_,
a pass in Annandale. The Annan, and the Frith of Solway, into which
it falls, are the frequent scenes of tragical accidents. The editor
trusts he will be pardoned for inserting the following awfully
impressive account of such an event, contained in a letter from Dr
Currie, of Liverpool, by whose correspondence, while in the course of
preparing these volumes for the press, he has been alike honoured and
instructed. After stating, that he had some recollection of the ballad
which follows, the biographer of Burns proceeds thus: "I once in my
early days heard (for it was night, and I could not see) a traveller
drowning; not in the Annan itself, but in the Frith of Solway, close
by the mouth of that river. The influx of the tide had unhorsed him,
in the night, as he was passing the sands from Cumberland. The west
wind blew a tempest, and, according to the common expression, brought
in the water, _three foot a-breast_. The traveller got upon a standing
net, a little way from the shore. There he lashed himself to the post,
shouting for half an hour for assistance--till the tide rose over his
head! In the darkness of night, and amid the pauses of the hurricane,
his voice, heard at intervals, was exquisitely mournful. No one could
go to his assistance--no one knew where he was--the sound seemed to
proceed from the spirit of the waters. But morning rose--the tide had
ebbed--and the poor traveller was found lashed to the pole of the net,
and bleaching in the wind."
"Annan water's wading deep,
"And my love Annie's wondrous bonny;
"And I am laith she suld weet her feet,
"Because I love her best of ony.
"Gar saddle me the bonny black;
"Gar saddle sune, and make him ready:
"For I will down the Gatehope-slack,
"And all to see my bonny ladye."
He has loupen on the bonny black,
He stirr'd him wi' the spur right sairly;
But, or he wan the Gatehope-slack,
I think the steed was wae and weary.
He has loupen on the bonny gray,
He rade the right gate and the ready;
I trow he would neither stint nor stay,
For he was seeking his bonny ladye.
O he has ridden ower field and fell,
Through muir and moss, and mony a mire;
His spurs o' steel were sair to bide,
And frae her fore-feet flew the fire.
"Now, bonny gray, now play your part!
"Gin ye be the steed that wins my deary,
"Wi' corn and hay ye'se be fed for aye,
"And never spur sall make you wearie."
The gray was a mare, and a right good mare;
But when she wan the Annan water,
She could na hae ridden a furlong mair,
"O boatman, boatman, put off your boat!
"Put off your boat for gowden monie!
"I cross the drumly stream the night,
"Or never mair I see my honey."
"O I was sworn sae late yestreen,
"And not by ae aith, but by many;
"And for a' the gowd in fair Scotland,
"I dare na take ye through to Annie."
The side was stey, and the bottom deep,
Frae bank to brae the water pouring;
And the bonny gray mare did sweat for fear,
For she heard the water kelpy roaring.
The silver buttons glanced bonny;
The waistcoat bursted aff his breast,
He was sae full of melancholy.
He has ta'en the ford at that stream tail;
I wot he swam both strong and steady;
But the stream was broad, and his strength did fail,
And he never saw his bonny ladye.
"And wae betide the bush of briar!
"It brake into my true love's hand,
"When his strength did fail, and his limbs did tire.
"And wae betide ye, Annan water,
"This night that ye are a drumlie river!
"For over thee I'll build a bridge,
"That ye never more true love may sever."
This ballad differs essentially from that which has been published in
various collections, under the title of _Binnorie_. It is compiled from
a copy in Mrs Brown's MSS., intermixed with a beautiful fragment, of
fourteen verses, transmitted to the editor by J. C. Walker, Esq. the
ingenious historian of the Irish bards. Mr Walker, at the same time,
favoured the editor with the following note:--"I am indebted to my
departed friend, Miss Brook, for the foregoing pathetic fragment. Her
account of it was as follows: This song was transcribed, several years
ago, from the memory of an old woman, who had no recollection of the
concluding verses: probably the beginning may also be lost, as it seems
to commence abruptly." The first verse and burden of the fragment run
thus:--
O sister, sister, reach thy hand!
Hey ho, my Nanny, O;
And you shall be heir of all my land,
While the swan swims bonny, O.
The first part of this chorus seems to be corrupted from the common
burden of _Hey, Nonny, Nonny_, alluded to in the song, beginning,
"_Sigh no more, ladye_." The chorus, retained in this edition, is the
most common and popular; but Mrs Brown's copy bears a yet different
burden, beginning thus:--
There were twa sisters sat in a bour,
Edinborough, Edinborough;
There were twa sisters sat in a bour,
Stirling for aye;
There were twa sisters sat in a bour,
There cam a knight to be their wooer,
Bonny St Johnston stands upon Tay.
There were two sisters sat in a bour;
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
There came a knight to be their wooer;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
He courted the eldest with glove and ring;
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
But he lo'ed the youngest aboon a' thing;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
He courted the eldest with broach and knife;
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
But he lo'ed the youngest abune his life;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
The eldest she was vexed sair;
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
And sore envied her sister fair;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
The eldest said to the youngest ane,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
"Will ye go and see our father's ships come in?"
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
She's ta'en her by the lilly hand,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
And led her down to the river strand;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
The youngest stude upon a stane,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
The eldest came and pushed her in;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
She took her by the middle sma',
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
And dashed her bonny back to the jaw,
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
"O sister, sister, reach your hand,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
"And ye shall be heir of half my land."
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
"O sister, I'll not reach my hand,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
"And I'll be heir of all your land;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
"Shame fa' the hand that I should take,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
"Its twin'd me, and my world's make."
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
"O sister, reach me but your glove,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
"And sweet William shall be your love."
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
"Sink on, nor hope for hand or glove!
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
"And sweet William shall better be my love."
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
"Your cherry cheeks and your yellow hair,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
"Garr'd me gang maiden evermair."
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
Sometimes she sunk, and sometimes she swam,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
Until she cam to the miller's dam,
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
"O father, father, draw your dam!
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
"There's either a mermaid, or a milk-white swan."
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
The miller hasted and drew his dam,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
And there he found a drowned woman,
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
You could not see her yellow hair,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
For gowd and pearls that were sae rare,
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
You could na see her middle sma',
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
Her gowden girdle was sae bra';
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
A famous harper passing by,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
The sweet pale face he chanced to spy;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
And when he looked that lady on,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
He sighed, and made a heavy moan;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
He made a harp of her breast-bone,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
Whose sounds would melt a heart of stone;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
The strings he framed of her yellow hair,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
Whose notes made sad the listening ear;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
He brought it to her father's hall;
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
And there was the court assembled all;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
He laid this harp upon a stone,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
And straight it began to play alone;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
"O yonder sits my father, the king,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
"And yonder sits my mother, the queen;
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
"And yonder stands my brother Hugh,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
"And by him my William sweet and true."
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
But the last tune that the harp play'd then,
Binnorie, O Binnorie;
Was--"Woe to my sister, false Helen!"
By the bonny milldams of Binnorie.
"In the very time of the General Assembly, there comes to public
knowledge a haynous murther, committed in the court; yea, not far
from the queen's lap: for a French woman, that served in the queen's
chamber, had played the whore with the queen's own apothecary.--The
woman conceived and bare a childe, whom, with common consent, the
father and mother murthered; yet were the cries of a new-borne
childe hearde, searche was made, the childe and the mother were both
apprehended, and so was the man and the woman condemned to be hanged
in the publicke street of Edinburgh.--The punishment was suitable,
because the crime was haynous. But yet was not the court purged of
whores and whoredoms, which was the fountaine of such enormities; for
it was well known that shame hasted marriage betwixt John Sempill,
bruit the Maries, and the rest of the dancers of the court had, the
ballads of that age do witnesse, which we, for modestie's sake, omit:
but this was the common complaint of all godly and wise men, that,
if they thought such a court could long continue, and if they looked
for no better life to come, they would have wished their sonnes and
daughters rather to have been brought up with fiddlers and dancers, and
to have been exercised with flinging upon a floore, and in the rest
that thereof followes, than to have been exercised in the company of
the godly, and exercised in virtue, which, in that court was hated,
and filthenesse not only maintained, but also rewarded; witnesse the
abbey of Abercorne, the barony of Auchvermuchtie, and divers others,
pertaining to the patrimony of the crown, given in heritage to skippers
and dancers, and dalliers with dames. This was the beginning of the
regiment of Mary, queen of Scots, and these were the fruits that she
brought forth of France.--_Lord! look on our miseries! and deliver us
from_ _the wickednesse of this corrupt court!_"--KNOX's _History of
the Reformation_, p. 373-4.
Such seems to be the subject of the following ballad, as narrated
by the stern apostle of presbytery. It will readily strike the
reader, that the tale has suffered great alterations, as handed
down by tradition; the French waiting-woman being changed into Mary
is less surprising, when we recollect, that one of the heaviest of the
queen's complaints against her ill-fated husband, was his infidelity,
and that even with her personal attendants. I have been enabled to
publish the following complete edition of the ballad, by copies from
various quarters; that principally used, was communicated to me, in the
most polite manner, by Mr Kirkpatricke Sharpe, of Hoddom, to whom I am
indebted for many similar favours.
Marie Hamilton's to the kirk gane,
Wi' ribbons on her hair;
The king thought mair o' Marie Hamilton,
Than ony that were there.
Marie Hamilton's to the kirk gane,
Wi' ribbons on her breast;
The king thought mair o' Marie Hamilton,
Than he listen'd to the priest.
Marie Hamilton's to the kirk gane,
Wi' gluves upon her hands;
The king thought mair o' Marie Hamilton,
Than the queen and a' her lands.
She hadna been about the king's court
A month, but barely one,
Till she was beloved by a' the king's court,
And the king the only man.
She hadna been about the king's court
A month, but barely three,
Till frae the king's court Marie Hamilton,
Marie Hamilton durst na be.
The king is to the Abbey gane,
To pu' the Abbey tree,
To scale the babe frae Marie's heart;
But the thing it wadna be.
O she has row'd it in her apron,
And set it on the sea,--
"Gae sink ye, or swim ye, bonny babe,
"Ye'se get na mair o' me."
Word is to the kitchen gane,
And word is to the ha',
And word is to the noble room,
Amang the ladyes a',
That Marie Hamilton's brought-to-bed,
And the bonny babe's mist and awa.
Scarcely had she lain down again,
And scarcely fa'n asleep,
When up then started our gude queen,
Just at her bed-feet;
Saying--"Marie Hamilton, where's your babe?
"For I'm sure I heard it greet."
"O no, O no, my noble queen!
"Think no such thing to be;
"'Twas but a stitch into my side,
"And sair it troubles me."
"Get up, get up, Marie Hamilton;
"Get up, and follow me;
"For I am going to Edinburgh town,
"A rich wedding for to see."
O slowly, slowly, raise she up,
And slowly put she on;
And slowly rode she out the way,
Wi' mony a weary groan.
The queen was clad in scarlet,
Her merry maids all in green;
And every town that they cam to,
They took Marie for the queen.
"Ride hooly, hooly, gentlemen,
"Ride hooly now wi' me!
"For never, I am sure, a wearier burd
"Rade in your cumpanie."
But little wist Marie Hamilton,
When she rade on the brown,
That she was ga'en to Edinburgh town,
And a' to be put down.
"Why weep ye so, ye burgess wives,
"Why look ye so on me?
"O, I am going to Edinburgh town,
"A rich wedding for to see."
When she gaed up the tolbooth stairs,
The corks frae her heels did flee;
And lang or e'er she cam down again,
She was condemned to die.
When she cam to the Netherbow port,
She laughed loud laughters three;
But when she cam to the gallows foot,
The tears blinded her e'e.
"Yestreen the queen had four Maries,
"The night she'll hae but three;
"There was Marie Seaton, and Marie Beaton,
"And Marie Carmichael, and me.
"O, often have I dress'd my queen,
"And put gold upon her hair;
"But now I've gotten for my reward,
"The gallows to be my share;
"Often have I dress'd my queen,
"And often made her bed;
"But now I've gotten for my reward
"The gallows tree to tread.
"I charge ye all, ye mariners,
"When ye sail ower the faem,
"Let neither my father nor mother get wit,
"But that I'm coming hame.
"I charge ye all, ye mariners,
"That sail upon the sea,
"Let neither my father nor mother get wit
"This dog's death I'm to die.
"For if my father and mother got wit,
"And my bold brethren three,
"O, mickle wad be the gude red blude,
"This day wad be spilt for me!
"O little did my mother ken,
"The day she cradled me,
"The lands I was to travel in,
"Or the death I was to die!"
_When she cam to the Netherbow port._--P. 93, v. 1.
The Netherbow port was the gate which divided the city of Edinburgh
from the suburb, called the Canongate. It had towers and a spire,
which formed a fine termination to the view from the Cross. The gate
was pulled down, in one of those fits of rage for indiscriminate
destruction, with which the magistrates of a corporation are sometimes
visited.
_Yestreen the queen had four Maries,_
_The night she'll hae but three, &c._--P. 93. v. 2.
The queen's Maries were four young ladies of the highest families in
Scotland, who were sent to France in her train, and returned with her
to Scotland. They are mentioned by Knox, in the quotation introductory
to this ballad. Keith gives us their names, p. 55. "The young queen,
Mary, embarked at Dunbarton for France, ... and with her went ..., and
four young virgins, all of the name of Mary, viz. Livingston, Fleming,
Seaton, and Beatoun." The queen's Maries are mentioned again by the
same author, p. 288, and 291, in the note. Neither Mary Livingston, nor
Mary Fleming, are mentioned in the ballad; nor are the Mary Hamilton,
and Mary Carmichael, of the ballad mentioned by Keith. But if this
corps continued to consist of young virgins, as when originally raised,
it could hardly have subsisted without occasional recruits; especially
if we trust our old bard, and John Knox.
The following additional notices of the queen's Maries occur, in
MONTEITH's _Translation of Buchanan's Epigrams, &c._
Page 60. _Pomp of the Gods at the Marriage of Queen Mary, 29th July,
"Were of my quire the glorious dignitie:
"With these dear five the heaven I'd regain,
"The happiness of other gods to stain;
"At my lot, Juno, Venus, were in ire,
"And stole away one----"
"Fear not, Diana, I good tidings bring,
"And unto you glad oracles I sing;
"Juno commands your Maries to be married,
"And, in all state, to marriage-bed be carried."
"Five Maries thine;
"One Marie now remains of Delia's five,
"And she at wedlock o'er shortly will arrive."
P. 64. To Mary Fleming, the king's valentyn--
_Sundry Verses._
The queen's Maries are mentioned in many ballads, and the name seems to
have passed into a general denomination for female attendants:
Now bear a hand, my Maries a',
And busk me brave, and make me fine.
_Old Ballad._
Semple, (by Elizabeth Carlisle, a daughter of the Lord Torthorald)
was ancestor of the Semples of Beltrees. He was married to Mary,
sister to William Livingston, and one of the maids of honour to
Queen Mary; by whom he had Sir James Semple of Beltrees, his son and
heir," &c.; afterwards ambassador to England, for King James VI. in
_From Mr_ HERD's _MS., where the following Note is prefixed to
it_--"Copied from the mouth of a Milkmaid, 1771, by W. L."
It was originally the intention of the Editor to have omitted this
ballad, on account of the disagreeable nature of the subject. Upon
consideration, however, it seemed a fair sample of a certain class
of songs and tales, turning upon incidents the most horrible and
unnatural, with which the vulgar in Scotland are greatly delighted,
and of which they have current amongst them an ample store. Such,
indeed, are the subjects of composition in most nations, during the
early period of society; when the feelings, rude and callous, can only
be affected by the strongest stimuli, and where the mind does not,
as in a more refined age, recoil, disgusted, from the means by which
interest has been excited. Hence incest, parricide--crimes, in fine,
the foulest and most enormous, were the early themes of the Grecian
muse. Whether that delicacy, which precludes the modern bard from the
choice of such impressive and dreadful themes, be favourable to the
higher classes of poetic composition, may perhaps be questioned; but
there can be little doubt, that the more important cause of virtue and
morality is advanced by this exclusion. The knowledge, that enormities
are not without precedent, may promote, and even suggest, them. Hence,
the publication of the _Newgate Register_ has been prohibited by the
wisdom of the legislature; having been found to encourage those very
crimes, of which it recorded the punishment. Hence, too, the wise maxim
of the Romans, _Facinora ostendi dum puniantur, flagitia autem abscondi
debent_.
The ballad has a high degree of poetical merit.
O May she comes, and May she goes,
Down by yon gardens green;
And there she spied a gallant squire,
As squire had ever been.
And May she comes, and May she goes,
Down by yon hollin tree;
And there she spied a brisk young squire,
And a brisk young squire was he.
"Give me your green manteel, fair maid;
"Give me your maidenhead!
"Gin ye winna give me your green manteel,
"Give me your maidenhead!"
"Perhaps there may be bairns, kind sir;
"Perhaps there may be nane;
"But, if you be a courtier,
"You'll tell me soon your name."
"I am nae courtier, fair maid,
"But new come frae the sea;
"I am nae courtier, fair maid,
"But when I court with thee.
"They call me Jack, when I'm abroad;
"Sometimes they call me John;
"But, when I'm in my father's bower,
"Jock Randal is my name."
"Ye lee, ye lee, ye bonny lad!
"Sae loud's I hear you lee!
"For I'm Lord Randal's ae daughter,
"He has nae mair nor me."
"Ye lee, ye lee, ye bonny May!
"Sae loud's I hear ye lee!
"For I'm Lord Randal's ae ae son,
"Just now come o'er the sea."
She's putten her hand down by her gare,
And out she's ta'en a knife;
And she has put it in her heart's bleed,
And ta'en away her life.
And he has ta'en up his bonny sister,
With the big tear in his e'en;
And he has buried his bonny sister
Amang the hollins green.
And syne he's hyed him o'er the dale,
His father dear to see--
"Sing, Oh! and Oh! for my bonny hind,
"Beneath yon hollin tree!"
"What needs you care for your bonny hind?
"For it you needna care;
"Take you the best, gi' me the warst,
"Since plenty is to spare."
"I carena for your hinds, my lord;
"I carena for your fee;
"But, Oh! and Oh! for my bonny hind,
"Beneath the hollin tree!"
"O were ye at your sister's bower,
"Your sister fair to see,
"You'll think nae mair o' your bonny hind,
"Beneath the hollin tree."
O gin my love were yon red rose,
That grows upon the castle wa',
And I mysell a drap of dew,
Down on that red rose I would fa'.
O my love's bonny, bonny, bonny;
My love's bonny and fair to see:
Whene'er I look on her weel far'd face,
She looks and smiles again to me.
O gin my love were a pickle of wheat,
And growing upon yon lily lee,
And I mysell a bonny wee bird,
Awa wi' that pickle o' wheat I wad flee.
O my love's bonny, &c.
O gin my love were a coffer o' gowd,
And I the keeper of the key,
I wad open the kist whene'er I list,
And in that coffer I wad be.
O my love's bonny, &c.
_The following verses are taken down from recitation, and are averred
to be of the age of_ CHARLES I. _They have, indeed, much of the
romantic expression of passion, common to the poets of that period,
whose lays still reflected the setting beams of chivalry; but, since
their publication in the first edition of this work, the Editor has
been informed, that they were composed by the late Mr_ GRAHAM _of
Gartmore._
If doughty deeds my ladye please,
Right soon I'll mount my steed;
And strong his arm, and fast his seat,
That bears frae me the meed.
I'll wear thy colours in my cap,
Thy picture in my heart;
And he, that bends not to thine eye,
Shall rue it to his smart.
Then tell me how to woo thee, love;
O tell me how to woo thee!
For thy dear sake, nae care I'll take,
Tho' ne'er another trow me.
If gay attire delight thine eye,
I'll dight me in array;
I'll tend thy chamber door all night,
And squire thee all the day.
If sweetest sounds can win thy ear,
These sounds I'll strive to catch;
Thy voice I'll steal to woo thysell,
That voice that nane can match.
Then tell me how to woo thee, love;
O tell me how to woo thee!
For thy dear sake, nae care I'll take,
Tho' ne'er another trow me.
But if fond love thy heart can gain,
I never broke a vow;
Nae maiden lays her skaith to me,
I never loved but you.
For you alone I ride the ring,
For you I wear the blue;
For you alone I strive to sing,
O tell me how to woo.
O tell me how to woo thee, love;
O tell me how to woo thee!
For thy dear sake, nae care I'll take,
Tho' ne'er another trow me.
This little lyric piece, with those which immediately follow in the
collection, relates to the fatal battle of Flodden, in which the flower
of the Scottish nobility fell around their sovereign, James IV.
The ancient and received tradition of the burgh of Selkirk affirms,
that the citizens of that town distinguished themselves by their
gallantry on that disastrous occasion. Eighty in number, and headed
by their town-clerk, they joined their monarch on his entrance into
England. James, pleased with the appearance of this gallant troop,
knighted their leader, William Brydone, upon the field of battle,
from which few of the men of Selkirk were destined to return. They
distinguished themselves in the conflict, and were almost all slain.
The few survivors, on their return home, found, by the side of
Lady-Wood Edge, the corpse of a female, wife to one of their fallen
comrades, with a child sucking at her breast. In memory of this latter
event, continues the tradition, the present arms of the burgh bear,
a female, holding a child in her arms, and seated on a sarcophagus,
decorated with the Scottish lion; in the back-ground a wood.
A learned antiquary, whose judgment and accuracy claim respect, has
made some observations upon the probability of this tradition, which
the editor shall take the liberty of quoting, as an introduction to
what he has to offer upon the same subject. And, if he shall have the
misfortune to differ from the learned gentleman, he will at least lay
candidly before the public the grounds of his opinion.
"That the souters of Selkirk should, in 1513, amount to fourscore
fighting men, is a circumstance utterly incredible. It is scarcely
to be supposed, that all the shoemakers in Scotland could have
produced such an army, at a period when shoes must have been still
less worn than they are at present. Dr Johnson, indeed, was told
at Aberdeen, that the people learned the art of making shoes from
Cromwell's soldiers.--'The numbers,' he adds, 'that go barefoot,
are still sufficient to show that shoes may be spared: they are not
yet considered as necessaries of life; for tall boys, not otherwise
meanly dressed, run without them in the streets; and, in the islands,
the sons of gentlemen pass several of their first years with naked
feet.'--(_Journey to the Western Islands_, p. 55.) Away, then, with
the fable of the souters of Selkirk. Mr Tytler, though he mentions it
as the subject of a song, or ballad, 'does not remember ever to have
seen the original genuine words,'--as he obligingly acknowledged in a
letter to the editor. Mr Robertson, however, who gives the statistical
account of the parish of Selkirk, seems to know something more of the
matter--'Some,' says he, 'have _very falsely_ attributed to this event
(the battle of Flowden), that song,
'Up wi' the souters of Selkirk,
'And down with the Earl of Hume.'
"There was no Earl of Hume,' he adds, 'at that time, nor was this song
composed till long after. It arose from a bet betwixt the Philiphaugh
and Hume families; the souters (or shoemakers) of Selkirk, against the
men of Hume, at a match of foot-ball, in which the souters of Selkirk
completely gained, and afterwards perpetuated their victory in that
song.'--This is decisive; and so much for Scottish tradition."--Note
to _Historical Essay on Scotish Song_, prefixed to _Scotish Songs_ in
It is proper to remark, that the passage of Mr Robertson's statistical
account, above quoted, does not relate to the authenticity of the
tradition, but to the origin of the song, which is obviously a separate
and distinct question. The entire passage in the statistical account
(of which a part only is quoted in the essay) runs thus:
"Here, too, the inhabitants of the town of Selkirk, who breathed the
manly spirit of real freedom, justly merit particular attention. Of
one hundred citizens, who followed the fortunes of James IV. on the
plains of Flowden, a few returned, loaded with the spoils taken from
the enemy. Some of these trophies still survive the rust of time, and
the effects of negligence. The desperate valour of the citizens of
Selkirk, which, on that fatal day, was eminently conspicuous to both
armies, produced very opposite effects. The implacable resentment
of the English reduced their defenceless town to ashes; while their
grateful sovereign (James V.) showed his sense of their valour, by a
grant of an extensive portion of the forest, the trees for building
their houses, and the property as the reward of their heroism."--A
note is added by Mr Robertson.--"A standard, the appearance of which
bespeaks its antiquity, is still carried annually (on the day of riding
their common) by the corporation of weavers, by a member of which it
was taken from the English in the field of Flowden. It may be added,
that the sword of William Brydone, the town clerk, who led the citizens
to the battle (and who is said to have been knighted for his valour),
is still in the possession of John Brydon, a citizen of Selkirk, his
lineal descendant."--An additional note contains the passage quoted in
the _Essay on Scotish Song_.
If the testimony of Mr Robertson is to be received as decisive of the
question, the learned author of the essay will surely admit, upon
re-perusal, that the passage in the statistical account contains
the most positive and unequivocal declaration of his belief in the
tradition.
Neither does the story itself, upon close examination, contain any
thing inconsistent with probability. The towns upon the border, and
especially Selkirk and Jedburgh, were inhabited by a race of citizens,
who, from the necessity of their situation, and from the nature of
their possessions (held by burgage tenure), were inured to the use
of arms. Selkirk was a county town, and a royal burgh; and when the
array of the kingdom, amounting to no less than one hundred thousand
warriors, was marshalled by the royal command, eighty men seems no
unreasonable proportion from a place of consequence, lying so very near
the scene of action.
Neither is it necessary to suppose, literally, that the men of Selkirk
were all _souters_. This appellation was obviously bestowed on them,
because it was the trade most generally practised in the town, and
therefore passed into a general epithet. Even the existence of such a
craft, however, is accounted improbable by the learned essayist, who
seems hardly to allow, that the Scottish nation was, at that period,
acquainted with the art "of accommodating their feet with shoes." And
here he attacks us with our own weapons, and wields the tradition of
Aberdeen against that of Selkirk. We shall not stop to enquire, in
what respect Cromwell's regiment of missionary cobblers deserves, in
point of probability, to take precedence of the souters of Selkirk.
But, allowing that all the shoemakers in England, with _Praise-the-Lord
Barebones_ at their head, had generously combined to instruct the men
of Aberdeen in the arts of psalmody and cobbling, it by no means bears
upon the present question. If instruction was at all necessary, it
must have been in teaching the natives how to make _shoes_, properly
so called, in opposition to _brogues_: For there were cordiners in
Aberdeen long before Cromwell's visit, and several fell in the battle
of the bridge of Dee, as appears from Spalding's _History of the
Troubles in Scotland_, Vol. II. p. 140. Now, the "single-soaled shoon,"
made by the souters of Selkirk, were a sort of brogues, with a single
thin soal; the purchaser himself performing the further operation of
sewing on another of thick leather. The rude and imperfect state of
this manufacture sufficiently evinces the antiquity of the craft. Thus,
the profession of the citizens of Selkirk, instead of invalidating,
confirms the traditional account of their valour.
The total devastation of this unfortunate burgh, after the fatal battle
of Flodden, is ascertained by the charters under which the corporation
hold their privileges. The first of these is granted by James V.,
and is dated 4th March, 1535-6. The narrative, or inductive clause
of the deed, is in these words: "_Sciatis quia nos considerantes et
intelligentes quod Carte Evidencie et litere veteris fundacionis et
infeofamenti burgi nostri de Selkirk et libertatum ejusdem burgensibus
et communitati ipsius per nobilissimos progenitores nostros quorum
animabus propicietur Deus dat. et concess. per guerrarum assultus
pestem combustionem et alias pro majore parte vastantur et distruuntur
unde mercantiarum usus inter ipsos burgenses cessavit in eorum
magnam lesionem ac reipublice et libertatis Burgi nostri antedict.
destruccionem et prejudicium ac ingens nobis dampnum penes nostras
Custumas et firmas burgales et eodem nobis debit. si subitumin eisdem
remedium minime habitum fuerit NOS igitur pietati et justicia moti
ac pro policia et edificiis infra regnum nostrum habend. de novo
infeodamus_," &c. The charter proceeds, in common form, to erect anew
the town of Selkirk into a royal burgh, with all the privileges annexed
to such corporations. This mark of royal favour was confirmed by a
second charter, executed by the same monarch, after he had attained the
age of majority, and dated April 8, 1538. This deed of confirmation
first narrates the charter, which has been already quoted, and then
proceeds to mention other grants, which had been conferred upon the
burgh, during the minority of James V., and which are thus expressed:
"We for the gude trew and thankful service done and to be done to ws
be owre lovittis the baillies burgesses and communite of our burgh of
Selkirk and for certaine otheris reasonable causis and considerationis
moving ws be the tennor hereof grantis and gevis license to thame and
acres of thair common landis of our said burgh in what part thairof
thea pleas for polecy strengthing and bigging of the samyn for the
wele of ws and of liegis repairand thairto and defence againis owre
auld innemyis of Ingland and other wayis and will and grantis that
thai sall nocht be callit accusit nor incur ony danger or skaith
thairthrow in thair personis landis nor gudis in ony wise in time
cuming NOCHTWITHSTANDING ony owre actis or statutis maid or to be maid
in the contrar in ony panys contenit tharein anent the quhilkis we
dispens with thame be thir owre letters with power to them to occupy
the saidis landis with thare awne gudis or to set theme to tenentis
as thai sall think maist expedient for the wele of our said burgh
with frei ische and entri and with all and sindry utheris commoditeis
freedomes asiamentis and richtuis pertinentis whatsumever pertenyng
or that rychtuisly may pertene thairto perpetually in tyme cuming
frelie quietlie wele and in peace but ony revocatioun or agane calling
whatsumever Gevin under owre signet and subscrivit with owre hand
at Striveling the twenty day of Junii The yere of God ane thousand
five hundreth and thretty six yeris and of our regne the twenti
thre yere." Here follows another grant: "We UNDERSTANDING that owre
burgh of Selkirk and inhabitants thairof CONTINUALIE SEN THE FIELD
OF FLODOUNE hes been oppressiit heriit and owre runin be theves and
traitors whairthrow the hant of merchandice has cessit amangis thame
of langtyme bygane and thai heriit thairthrow and we defraudit of owre
custumis and dewites THAIRFOR and for divers utheris resonable causis
and considerationes moving us be the tenor heirof of our kinglie power
fre motive and autorite ryall grantis and gevis to thame and thair
successors ane fair day begynand at the feist of the Conception of owre
Lady next to cum aftere the day of the date hereof and be the octavis
of the sammyn perpetualy in time cuming To be usit and exercit be thame
als frelie in time cuming as ony uther fair is usit or exercit be ony
otheris owre burrowis within our realme payand yeirlie custumis and
doweities aucht and wont as effeiris frelie quietlie wele and in pece
but ony revocation obstakill impediment or agane calling whatsumever
subscrivet with owre hand and gevin under owre Signet at KIRKCALDY the
secund day of September The yere of God ane thousand five huudreth and
threty sex yeris and of our regne the twenty three yeir." The charter
of confirmation, in which all these deeds and letters of donation
are engrossed, proceeds to ratify and confirm them in the most ample
manner. The testing clause, as it is termed in law language, is in
these words: "_In cujus rei Testimonium huic presente carte nostre
confirmationis magnum sigillum nostrum apponi precepimus_ TESTIBUS
_Reverendissimo reverendisque in Christo Patribus Gawino Archiepisco
Glasguen. Cancellario nostro Georgio Episcopo Dunkelden. Henrico
Episcopo Candide Case nostreque Capelle regie Strivilengen. dilectis
nostris consanguineis Jacobo Moravie Comite &c. Archibaldo Comite
de Ergile Domino Campbell et Lorne Magistro Hospicii nostri Hugone
Comite de Eglinton Domino Montgomery Malcolmo Domino Flemyng magno
Camerario nostro Venerabilibus in Christo Patribus Patricio Priore
Ecclesie Metropolitane Sanctiandree Alexandro Abbate Monasterii nostri
de Cambuskynneth dilectis familiaribus nostris Thoma Erskin de Brechin
Secretario nostro Jocobo Colville de Estwemis compotorum nostrorum
rotulatore et nostre cancellarie directore militibus et Magistro
Jacobo Foulis de Colintoun nostrorum rotulorum Registri et Concilii
clerico apud Edinburgh octavo die mensis Aprilis Anno Domini millesimo
quingentesimo trigesimo octavo et regni nostri vicesimo quinto._"
From these extracts, which are accurately copied from the original
of importance before it was ruined by the English; and, 2d, "that the
voice of merchants had ceased in her streets," in consequence of the
fatal field of Flodden. But further, it seems reasonable to infer,
that so many marks of royal favour, granted within so short a time
of each other, evince the gratitude, as well as the compassion, of
the monarch, and were intended to reward the valour, as well as to
relieve the distress, of the men of Selkirk. Thus, every circumstance
of the written evidence, as far as it goes, tallies with the oral
tradition of the inhabitants; and, therefore, though the latter
may be exaggerated, it surely cannot be dismissed as entirely void
of foundation. That William Brydone actually enjoyed the honour of
knighthood, is ascertained by many of the deeds, in which his name
appears as a notary public. John Brydone, lineal descendant of the
gallant town-clerk, is still alive, and possessed of the reliques
mentioned by Mr Robertson. The old man, though in an inferior station
of life, receives considerable attention from his fellow-citizens, and
claims no small merit to himself on account of his brave ancestor.
Thus far concerning the tradition of the exploits of the men of
Selkirk, at Flodden field. Whether the following verses do, or do not,
bear any allusion to that event, is a separate and less interesting
question. The opinion of Mr Robertson, referring them to a different
origin, has been already mentioned; but his authority, though highly
respectable, is not absolutely decisive of the question.
The late Mr Plummer, sheriff-depute of the county of Selkirk, a
faithful and accurate antiquary, entertained a very opposite opinion.
He has thus expressed himself, upon the subject, in the course of his
literary correspondence with Mr Herd:
"Of the Souters of Selkirk, I never heard any words but the following
verse:
'Up with the Sutors of Selkirk,
'And down wi' the Earl of Home;
'And up wi' a' the bra' lads
'That sew the single-soled shoon.'
"It is evident, that these words cannot be so ancient as to come near
the time when the battle was fought; as Lord Home was not created an
earl till near a century after that period.
"Our clergyman, in the "Statistical Account," Vol. II. p. 48, note,
says, that these words were composed upon a match at foot-ball,
between the Philiphaugh and Home families. I was five years at school
at Selkirk, have lived all my days within two miles of that town, and
never once heard a tradition of this imaginary contest till I saw it in
print.
"Although the words are not very ancient, there is every reason
to believe, that they allude to the battle of Flodden, and to
the different behaviour of the souters, and Lord Home, upon that
occasion. At election dinners, &c. when the Selkirk folks begin to
get _fou'_, (merry) they always call for music, and for that tune
foot-ball, but many times speak of the battle of "Flodden."--_Letter
from Mr Plummer to Mr Herd, 13th January, 1793._
afforded him, to obtain information on this point, and has been enabled
to recover two additional verses of the song.
The yellow and green, mentioned in the second verse, are the liveries
of the house of Home. When the Lord Home came to attend the governor,
Albany, his attendants were arrayed in Kendal-green.--GODSCROFT.
Up wi' the Souters of Selkirk,
And down wi' the Earl of Home;
And up wi' a' the braw lads,
That sew the single-soled shoon.
Fye upon yellow and yellow,
And fye upon yellow and green;
But up with the true blue and scarlet,
And up wi' the single-soled sheen.
Up wi' the Souters of Selkirk,
For they are baith trusty and leal;
It is unnecessary here to enter into a formal refutation of the
popular calumny, which taxed Lord Home with being the murderer of
his sovereign, and the cause of the defeat at Flodden. So far from
exhibiting any marks of cowardice or disaffection, the division, headed
by that unfortunate nobleman, was the only part of the Scottish army
which was conducted with common prudence on that fatal day. This body
formed the vanguard, and entirely routed the division of Sir Edmund
Howard, to which they were opposed; but the reserve of the English
cavalry rendered it impossible for Home, notwithstanding his success,
to come to the aid of the king, who was irretrievably ruined by his
own impetuosity of temper.--PINKERTON'S _History_, Vol II. p. 105. The
escape of James from the field of battle, has been long deservedly
ranked with that of King Sebastian, and similar _speciosa miracula_
with which the vulgar have been amused in all ages. Indeed, the
Scottish nation were so very unwilling to admit any advantage on the
English part, that they seem actually to have set up pretensions to the
loss of their monarch, and his army, to any cause, rather than to his
own misconduct, and the superior military skill of the English. There
can be no doubt, that James actually fell on the field of battle, the
slaughter-place of his nobles.--_Pinkerton, ibid._ His dead body was
interred in the monastery of Sheen, in Surrey; and Stowe mentions, with
regard to it, the following degrading circumstances.
"After the battle, the bodie of the said king, being found, was closed
in lead, and conveyed from thence to London, and to the monasterie of
Sheyne, in Surry, where it remained for a time, in what order I am not
certaine; but, since the dissolution of that house, in the reigne of
Edward VI., Henry Gray, Duke of Norfolke, being lodged, and keeping
house there, I have been shewed the same bodie, so lapped in lead,
close to the head and bodie, throwne into a waste room, amongst the old
timber, lead, and other rubble. Since the which time, workmen there,
for their foolish pleasure, hewed off his head; and Lancelot Young,
master glazier to Queen Elizabeth, feeling a sweet savour to come
from thence, and seeing the same dried from all moisture, and yet the
form remaining, with haire of the head, and beard red, brought it to
London, to his house in Wood-street, where, for a time, he kept it, for
its sweetness, but, in the end, caused the sexton of that church (St
Michael's, Wood-street) to bury it amongst other bones taken out of
their charnell."--STOWE'S _Survey of London_, p. 539.
he wrote his statistical account of the parish of Selkirk; for it
appears, that, instead of a grant of lands, the privilege granted
to the community was a right of tilling one thousand acres of those
which already belonged to the burgh. Hence it follows, that, previous
to the field of Flodden, the town must have been possessed of a
spacious domain, to which a thousand acres in tillage might bear a due
proportion. This circumstance ascertains the antiquity and power of
the burgh; for, had this large tract of land been granted during the
minority of James V., the donation, to be effectual, must have been
included in the charters of confirmation.
burgh. Four or five bristles, such as are used by shoemakers, are
attached to the seal of the burgess ticket. These the new-made burgess
must dip in his wine, and pass through his mouth, in token of respect
for the souters of Selkirk. This ceremony is on no account dispensed
with.
sheriff-depute, and has himself the honour to be a souter of Selkirk,
may perhaps form the best apology for the length of this dissertation.
"Against the proud Scottes' clattering,
That never wyll leave their tratlying;
Wan they the field and lost theyr kinge?
They may well say, fie on that winning!
Lo these fond sottes and tratlying Scottes,
How they are blinde in theyr own minde,
And will not know theyr overthrow.
At Branxton moore they are so stowre,
So frantike mad, they say they had,
And wan the field with speare and shielde:
That is as true as black is blue, &c.
_Skelton Laureate against the Scottes._
The following well known, and beautiful stanzas, were composed many
years ago, by a lady of family, in Roxburghshire. The manner of the
ancient minstrels is so happily imitated, that it required the most
positive evidence to convince the editor that the song was of modern
date. Such evidence, however, he has been able to procure; having been
favoured, through the kind intervention of Dr Somerville (well known to
the literary world, as the historian of King William, &c.), with the
following authentic copy of the _Flowers of the Forest_.
From the same respectable authority, the editor is enabled to state,
that the tune of the ballad is ancient, as well as the two following
lines of the first stanza:
I've heard them lilting at the ewes milking,
.    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
.    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
The flowers of the forest are a' wede away.
Some years after the song was composed, a lady, who is now dead,
repeated to the author another imperfect line of the original ballad,
which presents a simple and affecting image to the mind:
"I ride single on my saddle,
"For the flowers of the forest are a' wede away."
The first of these trifling fragments, joined to the remembrance of
the fatal battle of Flodden (in the calamities accompanying which, the
inhabitants of Ettrick Forest suffered a distinguished share), and to
the present solitary and desolate appearance of the country, excited,
in the mind of the author, the ideas, which she has expressed in a
strain of elegiac simplicity and tenderness, which has seldom been
equalled.
I've heard them lilting, at the ewe milking,
Lasses a' lilting, before dawn of day;
But now they are moaning, on ilka green loaning;
The flowers of the forest are a' wede awae.
At bughts, in the morning, nae blithe lads are scorning;
Lasses are lonely, and dowie, and wae;
Nae daffing, nae gabbing, but sighing and sabbing;
Ilk ane lifts her leglin, and hies her awae.
In har'st, at the shearing, nae youths now are jearing;
Bandsters are runkled, and lyart or gray;
At fair, or at preaching, nae wooing, nae fleeching;
The flowers of the forest are a' wede awae.
At e'en, in the gloaming, nae younkers are roaming
'Bout stacks, with the lasses at bogle to play;
But ilk maid sits dreary, lamenting her deary--
The flowers of the forest are weded awae.
Dool and wae for the order, sent our lads to the border!
The English, for ance, by guile wan the day;
The flowers of the forest, that fought aye the foremost,
The prime of our land, are cauld in the clay.
We'll hear nae mair lilting, at the ewe milking;
Women and bairns are heartless and wae:
Sighing and moaning, on ilka green loaning--
The flowers of the forest are a' wede awae.
The following explanation of provincial terms may be found
useful.
_Lilting_--Singing cheerfully. _Loaning_--A broad
lane. _Wede awae_--Weeded out. _Scorning_--Rallying.
_Dowie_--Dreary. _Daffing and gabbing_--Joking and chatting.
_Leglin_--Milk-pail. _Har'st_--Harvest. _Shearing_--Reaping.
_Bandsters_--Sheaf-binders. _Runkled_--Wrinkled.
_Lyart_--Inclining to grey. _Fleeching_--Coaxing.
_Gloaming_--Twilight.
_At fair, or at preaching_, &c.--P. 127. v. 3.
These lines have been said to contain an anachronism; the supposed date
of the lamentation being about the period of the field of Flodden. The
editor can see no ground for this charge. Fairs were held in Scotland
from the most remote antiquity; and are, from their very nature, scenes
of pleasure and gallantry. The preachings of the friars were, indeed,
professedly, meetings for a graver purpose; but we have the authority
of the _Wife of Bath_ (surely most unquestionable in such a point),
that they were frequently perverted to places of rendezvous:
I had the better leisur for to pleie,
And for to see, and eke for to be seie
Of lusty folk. What wist I where my grace
Was shapen for to be, or in what place?
Therefore I made my visitations
To vigilies and to processions:
_To preachings eke_, and to thise pilgrimages,
To plays of miracles, and marriages, &c.
_Canterbury Tales._
The following verses, adapted to the ancient air of the _Flowers of
the Forest_, are, like the elegy which precedes them, the production
of a lady. The late Mrs Cockburn, daughter of Rutherford of Fairnalie,
in Selkirkshire, and relict of Mr Cockburn of Ormiston (whose father
was lord justice-clerk of Scotland), was the authoress. Mrs Cockburn
has been dead but a few years. Even at an age, advanced beyond the
usual bounds of humanity, she retained a play of imagination, and an
activity of intellect, which must have been attractive and delightful
in youth, but was almost preternatural at her period of life. Her
active benevolence, keeping pace with her genius, rendered her equally
an object of love and admiration. The editor, who knew her well, takes
this opportunity of doing justice to his own feelings; and they are in
unison with those of all who knew his regretted friend.
The verses, which follow, were written at an early period of life, and
without peculiar relation to any event, unless it were the depopulation
of Ettrick Forest.
I've seen the smiling of fortune beguiling,
I've tasted her favours, and felt her decay;
Sweet is her blessing, and kind her caressing,
But soon it is fled--it is fled far away.
I've seen the forest adorned of the foremost,
With flowers of the fairest, both pleasant and gay:
Full sweet was their blooming, their scent the air perfuming,
But now they are wither'd, and a' wede awae.
I've seen the morning, with gold the hills adorning,
And the red storm roaring, before the parting day;
I've seen Tweed's silver streams, glittering in the sunny beams,
O fickle fortune! why this cruel sporting?
Why thus perplex us poor sons of a day?
Thy frowns cannot fear me, thy smiles cannot cheer me,
Since the flowers of the forest are a' wede awae.
_This Ballad is a fragment from_ MR HERD'S _MS., communicated
to him by_ J. GROSSETT MUIRHEAD, _at Breadesholm, near Glasgow;
who stated, that he extracted it, as relating to his own
Family, from the complete Song, in which the names of twenty
or thirty gentlemen were mentioned, contained in a large
Collection, belonging to_ MR ALEXANDER MONRO, _merchant in
Lisbon, supposed now to be lost._
_It appears, from the Appendix to_ NESBIT'S _Heraldry,_ p. 264,
_that_ MUIRHEAD _of Lachop and Bullis, the person here called
the Laird of_ MUIRHEAD, _was a man of rank, being rentaller,
or perhaps feuar, of many crown lands in Galloway; and was, in
truth, slain_ "in Campo Belli de Northumberland sub vexillo
Regis," _i.e. in the Field of Flodden._
Afore the king in order stude
The stout laird of Muirhead,
Wi' that sam twa-hand muckle sword
That Bartram felled stark deid.
He sware he wadna lose his right
To fight in ilka field;
Nor budge him from his liege's sight,
Till his last gasp should yield.
Twa hunder mair, of his ain name,
Frae Torwood and the Clyde,
Sware they would never gang to hame,
But a' die by his syde.
And wond'rous weil they kept their troth;
This sturdy royal band
Rush'd down the brae, wi' sic a pith,
That nane cou'd them withstand.
Mony a bludey blow they delt,
The like was never seen;
And hadna that braw leader fallen,
They ne'er had slain the king.
Green Flodden! on thy blood-stained head
Descend no rain nor vernal dew;
But still, thou charnel of the dead,
May whitening bones thy surface strew!
Soon as I tread thy rush-clad vale,
Wild fancy feels the clasping mail;
The rancour of a thousand years
Glows in my breast; again I burn
To see the bannered pomp of war return,
And mark, beneath the moon, the silver light of spears.
Lo! bursting from their common tomb,
The spirits of the ancient dead
Dimly streak the parted gloom,
With awful faces, ghastly red;
As once, around their martial king,
They closed the death-devoted ring,
With dauntless hearts, unknown to yield;
In slow procession round the pile
Of heaving corses, moves each shadowy file,
And chaunts, in solemn strain, the dirge of Flodden field.
What youth, of graceful form and mien,
Foremost leads the spectred brave,
While o'er his mantle's folds of green
His amber locks redundant wave?
When slow returns the fated day,
That viewed their chieftain's long array,
Wild to the harp's deep, plaintive string,
The virgins raise the funeral strain,
From Ord's black mountain to the northern main,
And mourn the emerald hue which paints the vest of spring.
Alas! that Scottish maid should sing
The combat where her lover fell!
That Scottish bard should wake the string,
The triumph of our foes to tell!
Yet Teviot's sons, with high disdain,
Have kindled at the thrilling strain
That mourned their martial fathers' bier;
And, at the sacred font, the priest,
Through ages left the master-hand unblest,
To urge, with keener aim, the blood-encrusted spear.
Red Flodden! when thy plaintive strain,
In early youth, rose soft and sweet,
My life-blood, through each throbbing vein,
With wild tumultuous passion beat.
And oft, in fancied might, I trod
The spear-strewn path to Fame's abode,
Encircled with a sanguine flood;
And thought I heard the mingling hum,
When, croaking hoarse, the birds of carrion come
Afar, on rustling wing, to feast on English blood.
Rude border chiefs, of mighty name,
And iron soul; who sternly tore
The blossoms from the tree of fame,
And purpled deep their tints with gore,
Rush from brown ruins, scarred with age,
That frown o'er haunted Hermitage;
Where, long by spells mysterious bound,
They pace their round, with lifeless smile,
And shake, with restless foot, the guilty pile,
Till sink the mouldering towers beneath the burdened ground.
Shades of the dead! on Alfer's plain,
Who scorned with backward step to move,
But, struggling mid the hills of slain,
Against the sacred standard strove;
Amid the lanes of war I trace
Each broad claymore and ponderous mace:
Where'er the surge of arms is tost,
Your glittering spears, in close array,
Sweep, like the spider's filmy web, away
The flower of Norman pride, and England's victor host.
But distant fleets each warrior ghost,
With surly sounds, that murmur far;
Such sounds were heard when Syria's host
Roll'd from the walls of proud Samar
Around my solitary head
Gleam the blue lightnings of the dead,
While murmur low the shadowy band--
"Lament no more the warrior's doom!
Blood, blood alone, should dew the hero's tomb,
Who falls, 'mid circling spears, to save his native land."
_And mourn the emerald hue which paints the vest of spring._
P. 137. v. 2.
Under the vigorous administration of James IV. the young Earl of
Caithness incurred the penalty of outlawry and forfeiture, for
revenging an ancient feud. On the evening preceding the battle of
Flodden, accompanied by 300 young warriors, arrayed in green, he
presented himself before the king, and submitted to his mercy. This
mark of attachment was so agreeable to that warlike prince, that he
granted an immunity to the Earl and all his followers. The parchment,
on which this immunity was inscribed, is said to be still preserved
in the archives of the earls of Caithness, and is marked with the
drum-strings, having been cut out of a drum-head, as no other parchment
could be found in the army. The Earl, and his gallant band, perished
to a man in the battle of Flodden; since which period, it has been
reckoned unlucky in Caithness _to wear green_, or _cross the Ord on
a Monday_, the day of the week on which the chieftain advanced into
Sutherland.
_Through ages left the master-hand unblest_, &c.--P. 138. v. 1.
In the border counties of Scotland, it was formerly customary, when any
rancorous enmity subsisted between two clans, to leave the right hand
of male children unchristened, that it might deal the more deadly, or,
according to the popular phrase, "unhallowed" blows, to their enemies.
By this superstitious rite, they were devoted to bear the family feud,
or enmity. The same practice subsisted in Ireland, as appears from the
following passage in _Campion's History of Ireland_, published in 1633.
"In some corners of the land they used a damnable superstition, leaving
the right armes of their infants, males, unchristened (as they termed
it), to the end it might give a more ungracious and deadly blow." P. 15.
_Till sink the mouldering towers beneath the burdened ground._
P. 139. v. 1.
Popular superstition in Scotland still retains so formidable an idea of
the _guilt of blood_, that those ancient edifices, or castles, where
enormous crimes have been committed, are supposed to sink gradually
into the ground. With regard to the castle of Hermitage, in particular,
the common people believe, that thirty feet of the walls sunk, thirty
feet fell, and thirty feet remain standing.
_Against the sacred standard strove_, &c.--P. 139. v. 2.
The fatal battle of the standard was fought on Cowton Moor, near
Northallerton (A.S. Ealfertun), in Yorkshire, 1138. David I. commanded
the Scottish army. He was opposed by Thurston, archbishop of York,
who, to animate his followers, had recourse to the impressions of
religious enthusiasm. The mast of a ship was fitted into the perch
of a four-wheeled carriage; on its top was placed a little casket,
containing a consecrated host. It also contained the banner of St
Cuthbert, round which were displayed those of St Peter of York, St John
of Beverly, and St Wilfred of Rippon. This was the English standard,
and was stationed in the centre of the army. Prince Henry, son of
David, at the head of the men of arms, chiefly from Cumberland and
Teviotdale, charged, broke, and completely dispersed, the centre; but
unfortunately was not supported by the other divisions of the Scottish
army. The expression of Aldred (p. 345), describing this encounter, is
more spirited than the general tenor of monkish historians;--"_Ipsa
globi australis parte, instar cassis araneae dissipata_"--that division
of the phalanx was dispersed like a cobweb.
In the reign of Charles I., when the moss-trooping practices were
not entirely discontinued, the tower of Gilnockie, in the parish of
Cannoby, was occupied by William Armstrong, called, for distinction's
sake, _Christie's Will_, a lineal descendant of the famous John
of plunder had descended to this person with the family mansion;
and, upon some marauding party, he was seized, and imprisoned in the
tolbooth of Jedburgh. The Earl of Traquair, lord high treasurer,
happening to visit Jedburgh, and knowing Christie's Will, enquired the
cause of his confinement. Will replied, he was imprisoned for stealing
two _tethers_ (halters); but, upon being more closely interrogated,
acknowledged, there were two _delicate colts_ at the end of them.
The joke, such as it was, amused the Earl, who exerted his interest,
and succeeded in releasing Christie's Will from bondage. Some time
afterwards, a law-suit, of importance to Lord Traquair, was to be
decided in the Court of Session; and there was every reason to
believe, that the judgment would turn upon the voice of the presiding
judge, who has a casting vote, in case of an equal division among
his brethren. The opinion of the president was unfavourable to Lord
Traquair; and the point was, therefore, to keep him out of the way,
when the question should be tried. In this dilemma, the Earl had
recourse to Christie's Will; who, at once, offered his service, to
kidnap the president. Upon due scrutiny, he found it was the judge's
practice frequently to take the air, on horseback, on the sands of
Leith, without an attendant. In one of these excursions, Christie's
Will, who had long watched his opportunity, ventured to accost the
president, and engage him in conversation. His address and language
were so amusing, that he decoyed the president into an unfrequented
and furzy common, called the Frigate Whins, where, riding suddenly up
to him, he pulled him from his horse, muffled him in a large cloak,
which he had provided, and rode off, with the luckless judge trussed up
behind him. Will crossed the country with great expedition, by paths,
only known to persons of his description, and deposited his weary and
terrified burden in an old castle, in Annandale, called the Tower of
thrown his rider into the sea; his friends went into mourning, and a
successor was appointed to his office. Meanwhile, the poor president
spent a heavy time in the vault of the castle. He was imprisoned,
and solitary; receiving his food through an aperture in the wall,
and never hearing the sound of a human voice, save when a shepherd
called his dog, by the name of _Batty_, and when a female domestic
called upon _Maudge_, the cat. These, he concluded, were invocations
of spirits; for he held himself to be in the dungeon of a sorcerer. At
length, after three months had elapsed, the law-suit was decided in
favour of Lord Traquair; and Will was directed to set the president at
liberty. Accordingly, he entered the vault, at dead of night, seized
the president, muffled him once more in the cloak, without speaking
a single word, and, using the same mode of transportation, conveyed
him to Leith sands, and set down the astonished judge on the very
spot where he had taken him up. The joy of his friends, and the less
agreeable surprise of his successor, may be easily conceived, when he
appeared in court, to reclaim his office and honours. All embraced his
own persuasion, that he had been spirited away by witchcraft; nor could
he himself be convinced of the contrary, until, many years afterwards,
happening to travel in Annandale, his ears were saluted, once more,
with the sounds of _Maudge_ and _Batty_--the only notes which had
solaced his long confinement. This led to a discovery of the whole
story; but, in these disorderly times, it was only laughed at, as a
fair _ruse de guerre_.
Wild and strange as this tradition may seem, there is little doubt of
its foundation in fact. The judge, upon whose person this extraordinary
stratagem was practised, was Sir Alexander Gibson, Lord Durie,
collector of the reports, well known in the Scottish law, under the
title of _Durie's Decisions_. He was advanced to the station of an
ordinary lord of session, 10th July, 1621, and died, at his own house
of Durie, July 1646. Betwixt these periods his whimsical adventure must
have happened; a date which corresponds with that of the tradition.
"We may frame," says Forbes, "a rational conjecture of his great
learning and parts, not only from his collection of the decisions of
the session, from July 1621 till July 1642, but also from the following
circumstances: 1. In a tract of more as twenty years, he was frequently
chosen vice-president, and no other lord in that time. 2. 'Tis commonly
reported, that some party, in a considerable action before the session,
finding, that the Lord Durie could not be persuaded to think his plea
good, fell upon a stratagem to prevent the influence and weight, which
his lordship might have to his prejudice, by causing some strong
masked men kidnap him, in the links of Leith, at his diversion on a
Saturday afternoon, and transport him to some blind and obscure room
in the country, where he was detained captive, without the benefit of
day-light, a matter of three months (though otherways civilly and well
entertained); during which time his lady and children went in mourning
for him, as dead. But, after the cause aforesaid was decided, the Lord
Durie was carried back by incognitos, and dropt in the same place
where he had been taken up."--FORBES'S _Journal of the Session_, Edin.
Tradition ascribes to Christie's Will another memorable feat, which
seems worthy of being recorded. It is well known, that, during the
troubles of Charles I., the Earl of Traquair continued unalterably
fixed in his attachment to his unfortunate master, in whose service
he hazarded his person, and impoverished his estate. It was of
consequence, it is said, to the king's service, that a certain packet,
containing papers of importance, should be transmitted to him from
Scotland. But the task was a difficult one, as the parliamentary
leaders used their utmost endeavours to prevent any communication
betwixt the king and his Scottish friends. Traquair, in this strait,
again had recourse to the services of Christie's Will; who undertook
the commission, conveyed the papers safely to his majesty, and
received an answer, to be delivered to Lord Traquair. But, in the mean
time, his embassy had taken air, and Cromwell had dispatched orders
to intercept him at Carlisle. Christie's Will, unconscious of his
danger, halted in the town to refresh his horse, and then pursued his
journey. But, as soon as he began to pass the long, high, and narrow
bridge, which crosses the Eden at Carlisle, either end of the pass
was occupied by a party of parliamentary soldiers, who were lying in
wait for him. The borderer disdained to resign his enterprise, even
in these desperate circumstances; and at once forming his resolution,
spurred his horse over the parapet. The river was in high flood.
Will sunk--the soldiers shouted--he emerged again, and, guiding his
horse to a steep bank, called the Stanners, or Stanhouse, endeavoured
to land, but ineffectually, owing to his heavy horseman's cloak, now
drenched in water. Will cut the loop, and the horse, feeling himself
disembarrassed, made a desperate exertion, and succeeded in gaining
the bank. Our hero set off, at full speed, pursued by the troopers,
who had for a time stood motionless, in astonishment at his temerity.
Will, however, was well mounted; and, having got the start, he kept
it, menacing, with his pistols, any pursuer, who seemed likely to
gain on him--an artifice which succeeded, although the arms were wet
and useless. He was chaced to the river Eske, which he swam without
hesitation; and, finding himself on Scottish ground, and in the
neighbourhood of friends, he turned on the northern bank, and, in the
true spirit of a border rider, invited his followers to come through,
and drink with him. After this taunt, he proceeded on his journey, and
faithfully accomplished his mission. Such were the exploits of the very
last border freebooter of any note.
The reader is not to regard the ballad as of genuine and unmixed
antiquity, though some stanzas are current upon the border, in a
corrupted state. They have been eked and joined together, in the rude
and ludicrous manner of the original; but as it is to be considered as
a modern ballad, it is transferred to this department of the work.
Traquair has ridden up Chapelhope,
He never stinted the light gallop,
Untill he speer'd for Christie's Will.
Now Christie's Will peep'd frae the tower,
And out at the shot-hole keeked he;
"And ever unlucky," quo' he, "is the hour,
"That the warden comes to speer for me!"
"Good Christie's Will, now, have na fear!
"Nae harm, good Will, shall hap to thee:
"I saved thy life at the Jeddart air,
"At the Jeddart air frae the justice tree.
"By the lightning, the wind, and the rain,
"That if ever of Christie's Will I had need,
"He would pay me my service again."
"Gramercy, my lord," quo' Christie's Will,
"Gramercy, my lord, for your grace to me!
"When I turn my cheek, and claw my neck,
"I think of Traquair, and the Jeddart tree."
And he has opened the fair tower yate,
To Traquair and a' his companie;
The spule o' the deer on the board he has set,
The fattest that ran on the Hutton Lee.
"Now, wherefore sit ye sad, my lord?
"And wherefore sit ye mournfullie?
"And why eat ye not of the venison I shot,
"At the dead of night, on Hutton Lee?"
"O weel may I stint of feast and sport,
"And in my mind be vexed sair!
"A vote of the canker'd Session Court,
"Of land and living will make me bair.
"But if auld Durie to heaven were flown,
"Or if auld Durie to hell were gane,
"Or ... if he could be but ten days stown....
"My bonny braid lands would still be my ain."
"O mony a time, my lord," he said,
"I've stown the horse frae the sleeping loun;
"But for you I'll steal a beast as braid,
"For I'll steal Lord Durie frae Edinburgh town.
"O mony a time, my lord," he said,
"I've stown a kiss frae a sleeping wench;
"But for you I'll do as kittle a deed,
"For I'll steal an auld lurdane aff the bench."
And Christie's Will is to Edinburgh gane;
At the Borough Muir then entered he;
And as he pass'd the gallow-stane,
He cross'd his brow, and he bent his knee.
He lighted at Lord Durie's door,
And there he knocked most manfullie;
And up and spake Lord Durie, sae stoor,
"What tidings, thou stalward groom, to me?"
"The fairest lady in Teviotdale,
"Has sent, maist reverent Sir, for thee;
"She pleas at the session for her land, a' haill,
"And fain she wad plead her cause to thee."
"But how can I to that lady ride,
"With saving of my dignitie?"
"O a curch and mantle ye may wear,
"And in my cloak ye sall muffled be."
Wi' curch on head, and cloak ower face,
He mounted the judge on a palfrey fyne;
He rode away, a right round pace,
And Christie's Will held the bridle reyn.
The Lothian Edge they were not o'er,
When they heard bugles bauldly ring,
And, hunting over Middleton Moor,
They met, I ween, our noble king.
When Willie look'd upon our king,
I wot a frightened man was he!
But ever auld Durie was startled more,
For tyning of his dignitie.
The king he cross'd himself, I wis,
When as the pair came riding bye--
"An uglier crone, and a sturdier lown,
"I think, were never seen with eye!"
Willie has hied to the tower of Graeme,
He took auld Durie on his back,
He shot him down to the dungeon deep,
Which garr'd his auld banes gie mony a crack.
For nineteen days, and nineteen nights,
Of sun, or moon, or midnight stern,
Auld Durie never saw a blink,
The lodging was sae dark and dern.
He thought the warlocks o' the rosy cross
Had fang'd him in their nets sae fast;
Or that the gypsies' glamour'd gang,
These were the morning sounds heard he;
And "ever alack!" auld Durie cried,
"The deil is hounding his tykes on me!"
And whiles a voice on _Baudrons_ cried,
With sound uncouth, and sharp, and hie;
"I have tar-barrell'd mony a witch,
"But now, I think, they'll clear scores wi' me!"
The king has caused a bill be wrote,
And he has set it on the Tron,--
"He that will bring Lord Durie back,
"Shall have five hundred merks and one."
Traquair has written a braid letter,
And he has seal'd it wi' his seal,--
"The land's my ain, and a's gane weel."
O Will has mounted his bonny black,
And to the tower of Graeme did trudge,
And once again, on his sturdy back,
Has he hente up the weary judge.
He brought him to the council stairs,
And there full loudly shouted he,
"Gie me my guerdon, my sovereign liege,
"And take ye back your auld Durie!"
_He thought the warlocks o' the rosy cross._--P. 158. v. 4.
"As for the rencounter betwixt Mr Williamson, schoolmaster at Cowper
(who has wrote a grammar), and the Rosicrucians, I never trusted it,
till I heard it from his own son, who is present minister of Kirkaldy.
He tells, that a stranger came to Cowper, and called for him: after
they had drank a little, and the reckoning came to be paid, he whistled
for spirits; one, in the shape of a boy, came, and gave him gold in
abundance; no servant was seen riding with him to the town, nor enter
with him into the inn. He caused his spirits, against next day, bring
him noble Greek wine, from the Pope's cellar, and tell the freshest
news then at Rome; then trysted Mr Williamson at London, who met the
same man, in a coach, near to London bridge, and who called on him by
his name; he marvelled to see any know him there; at last he found it
was his Rosicrucian. He pointed to a tavern, and desired Mr Williamson
to do him the favour to dine with him at that house; whither he came
at twelve o'clock, and found him, and many others of good fashion
there, and a most splendid and magnificent table, furnished with all
the varieties of delicate meats, where they are all served by spirits.
At dinner, they debated upon the excellency of being attended by
spirits; and, after dinner, they proposed to him to assume him into
their society, and make him participant of their happy life; but, among
the other conditions and qualifications requisite, this was one, that
they demanded his abstracting his spirit from all materiality, and
renouncing his baptismal engagements. Being amazed at this proposal, he
falls a praying; whereat they all disappear, and leave him alone. Then
he began to forethink what would become of him, if he were left to pay
that vast reckoning; not having as much on him as would defray it. He
calls the boy, and asks, what was become of these gentlemen, and what
was to pay? He answered, there was nothing to pay, for they had done
it, and were gone about their affairs in the city."--FOUNTAINHALL's
_Decisions_, Vol. I. p. 15. With great deference to the learned
reporter, this story has all the appearance of a joke upon the poor
schoolmaster, calculated at once to operate upon his credulity, and
upon his fears of being left in pawn for the reckoning.
_Or that the gypsies' glamour'd gang, &c._--P. 158. v. 4.
Besides the prophetic powers, ascribed to the gypsies in most European
countries, the Scottish peasants believe them possessed of the power of
throwing upon by-standers a spell, to fascinate their eyes, and cause
them to see the thing that is not. Thus, in the old ballad of Johnie
Faa, the elopement of the countess of Cassillis, with a gypsey leader,
is imputed to fascination:
As sune as they saw her weel-far'd face,
They cast the _glamour_ ower her.
Saxo Grammaticus mentions a particular sect of _Mathematicians_, as
he is pleased to call them, who "_per summam ludificandorum oculorum
peritiam, proprios alienosque vultus, variis rerum imaginibus,
adumbrare callebant; illicibusque formis veros obscurare conspectus_."
Merlin, the son of Ambrose, was particularly skilled in this art, and
displays it often in the old metrical romance of _Arthour and Merlin_:
Tho' thai com the kinges neighe
Merlin hef his heued on heighe
And kest on hem enchauntement
That he hem alle allmest blent
That non other sen no might
A gret while y you plight &c.
The _jongleurs_ were also great professors of this mystery, which has
in some degree descended, with their name, on the modern jugglers.
But durst Breslaw, the Sieur Boaz, or Katterfelto himself, have
encountered, in magical slight, the _tregetoures_ of father Chaucer, who
---- within a hall large
Have made come in a water and a barge,
And in the halle rowen up and down;
Somtime hath semed come a grim leoun,
And somtime flowres spring as in a mede;
Somtime a vine and grapes white and rede,
Somtime a castel al of lime and ston;
And when hem liketh voideth it anon.
Thus seemeth it to every mannes sight.--
_Frankeleene's Tale._
And, again, the prodigies exhibited by the clerk of Orleans to
Aurelius:--
He shewd him or they went to soupere
Forestes, parkes, ful of wilde dere;
Ther saw he hartes with hir hornes hie,
The gretest that were ever seen with eie:
He saw of hem an hundred slain with houndes,
And some with arwes blede of bitter woundes:
He saw, when voided were the wilde dere,
Thise fauconers upon a fair rivere,
That with hir haukes han the heron slain:
Tho saw he knightes justen on a plain;
And after this he did him swiche plesance,
That he him shewd his lady on a dance,
On which himselven danced, as him thought:
And whan this maister that this magike wrought,
Saw it was time, he clapt his handes two,
And farewell! all the revel is ago.
And yet remued they never out of the house,
While they saw all thise sights merveillous:
But in his studie ther his bookes be,
They saten still and no wight but this three.
_Ibidem._
Our modern professors of the _magic natural_ would likewise have been
sorely put down by the _Jogulours_ and _Enchantours_ of the _Grete
Chan_; "for they maken to come in the air the sone and the mone,
beseminge to every mannes sight; and aftre, they maken the nyght so
dirke, that no man may se no thing; and aftre, they maken the day to
come agen, fair and plesant, with bright sone to every mannes sight;
and than, they bringin in daunces of the fairest damyselles of the
world, and richest arrayed; and after, they maken to comen in other
damyselles, bringing coupes of gold, fulle of mylke of diverse bestes;
and geven drinke to lordes and to ladyes; and than they maken knyghtes
to justen in arms fulle lustyly; and they rennen togidre a gret
randoun, and they frusschen togidere full fiercely, and they broken
her speres so rudely, that the trenchouns flen in sprotis and pieces
alle aboute the halle; and than they make to come in hunting for the
hert and for the boor, with houndes renning with open mouthe: and many
other things they dow of her enchauntements, that it is marveyle for
to se."--_Sir_ JOHN MANDEVILLE's _Travels_, p. 285. I question much,
also, if the most artful _illuminatus_ of Germany could have matched
the prodigies exhibited by Pacolet and Adramain. "_Adonc Adramain
leva une cappe par dessus une pillier, et en telle sort, qu'il sembla
a ceux qui furent presens, que parmi la place couroit, une riviere
fort grande et terrible. Et en icelle riviere sembloit avoir poissons
en grand abondance, grands et petits. Et quand ceux de palais virent
l'eau si grande, ils commencerent tous a lever leur robes et a
crier fort, comme sils eussent eu peur d'estre noye; et Pacolet, qui
l'enchantement regarda, commenca a chanter, et fit un sort si subtil en
son chant qui sembla a tous ceux de lieu que parmy la riviere couroit
un cerf grand et cornu, qui jettoit et abbatoit a terre tout ce que
devant lui trouvoit, puis leur fut advis que voyoyent chasseurs et
veneurs courir apris le Cerf, avec grande puissance de levriers et des
chiens. Lors y eut plusieurs de la compagnie qui saillirent au devant
pour le Cerf attraper et cuyder prendre; mais Pacolet fist tost le
Cerf sailler. "Bien avez joue," dit Orson, "et bien scavez vostre art
user."_--L'Histoire des Valentin et Orson, a Rouen, 1631. The receipt,
to prevent the operation of these deceptions, was, to use a sprig of
four-leaved clover. I remember to have heard (certainly very long ago,
for, at the time, I believed the legend), that a gypsey exercised his
_glamour_ over a number of people at Haddington, to whom he exhibited
a common dung-hill cock, trailing, what appeared to the spectators, a
massy oaken trunk. An old man passed with a cart of clover; he stopped,
and picked out a four-leaved blade; the eyes of the spectators were
opened, and the oaken trunk appeared to be a bulrush.
_I have tar-barrell'd mony a witch._--P. 159. v. 1.