"A writhled forehead, hair gone grey,
Fallen eyebrows, eyes gone blind and red,
Their laughs and looks all fled away,
Yea, all that smote men's hearts are fled;
The bowed nose, fallen from goodlihead;
Foul flapping ears like water-flags;
Peaked chin, and cheeks all waste and dead,
And lips that are two skinny rags:
"Thus endeth all the beauty of us.
The arms made short, the hands made lean,
The shoulders bowed and ruinous,
The breasts, alack! all fallen in;
The flanks too, like the breasts, grown thin;
For the lank thighs, no thighs but skin,
They are specked with spots like sausage-meat.
"So we make moan for the old sweet days,
Poor old light women, two or three
Squatting above the straw-fire's blaze,
The bosom crushed against the knee,
Like faggots on a heap we be,
Round fires soon lit, soon quenched and done;
And we were once so sweet, even we!
Thus fareth many and many an one."
Now take your fill of love and glee,
And after balls and banquets hie;
In the end ye'll get no good for fee,
But just heads broken by and by;
Light loves make beasts of men that sigh;
They changed the faith of Solomon,
And left not Samson lights to spy;
Good luck has he that deals with none!
Sweet Orpheus, lord of minstrelsy,
For this with flute and pipe came nigh
The danger of the dog's heads three
That ravening at hell's door doth lie;
Fain was Narcissus, fair and shy,
For love's love lightly lost and won,
In a deep well to drown and die;
Good luck has he that deals with none!
Sardana, flower of chivalry,
Who conquered Crete with horn and cry,
For this was fain a maid to be
And learn with girls the thread to ply;
King David, wise in prophecy,
Forgot the fear of God for one
Seen washing either shapely thigh;
Good luck has he that deals with none!
For this did Amnon, craftily
Feigning to eat of cakes of rye,
Deflower his sister fair to see,
Which was foul incest; and hereby
Was Herod moved, it is no lie,
To lop the head of Baptist John
For dance and jig and psaltery;
Good luck has he that deals with none!
Next of myself I tell, poor me,
How thrashed like clothes at wash was I
Stark naked, I must needs agree;
Who made me eat so sour a pie
But Katherine of Vaucelles? thereby,
Noe took third part of that fun;
Such wedding-gloves are ill to buy;
Good luck has he that deals with none!
But for that young man fair and free
To pass those young maids lightly by,
Nay, would you burn him quick, not he;
Like broom-horsed witches though he fry,
They are sweet as civet in his eye;
But trust them, and you're fooled anon;
For white or brown, and low or high,
Good luck has he that deals with none!
And Paris be it or Helen dying,
Who dies soever, dies with pain.
He that lacks breath and wind for sighing,
His gall bursts on his heart; and then
He sweats, God knows what sweat!--again,
No man may ease him of his grief;
Child, brother, sister, none were fain
To bail him thence for his relief.
Death makes him shudder, swoon, wax pale,
Nose bend, veins stretch, and breath surrender,
Neck swell, flesh soften, joints that fail
Crack their strained nerves and arteries slender.
O woman's body found so tender,
Smooth, sweet, so precious in men's eyes,
Must thou too bear such count to render?
Yes; or pass quick into the skies.
of the Ladies of Old Time_, so incomparably rendered in the marvellous
version of D. G. Rossetti; followed in its turn by the succeeding poem, as
inferior to its companion as is my attempt at translation of it to his
What more? Where is the third Calixt,
Last of that name now dead and gone,
Who held four years the Papalist?
Alphonso king of Aragon,
The gracious lord, duke of Bourbon,
And Arthur, duke of old Britaine?
And Charles the Seventh, that worthy one?
Even with the good knight Charlemain.
The Scot too, king of mount and mist,
With half his face vermilion,
Men tell us, like an amethyst
From brow to chin that blazed and shone;
The Cypriote king of old renown,
Alas! and that good king of Spain,
Whose name I cannot think upon?
Even with the good knight Charlemain.
No more to say of them I list;
'Tis all but vain, all dead and done:
For death may no man born resist,
Nor make appeal when death comes on.
I make yet one more question;
Where's Lancelot, king of far Bohain?
Where's he whose grandson called him son?
Even with the good knight Charlemain.
Where is Guesclin, the good Breton?
The lord of the eastern mountain-chain,
And the good late duke of Alencon?
Even with the good knight Charlemain.
Albeit the Venice girls get praise
For their sweet speech and tender air,
And though the old women have wise ways
Of chaffering for amorous ware,
Yet at my peril dare I swear,
Search Rome, where God's grace mainly tarries,
Florence and Savoy, everywhere,
There's no good girl's lip out of Paris.
The Naples women, as folk prattle,
Are sweetly spoken and subtle enough:
German girls are good at tattle,
And Prussians make their boast thereof;
Take Egypt for the next remove,
Or that waste land the Tartar harries,
Spain or Greece, for the matter of love,
There's no good girl's lip out of Paris.
Breton and Swiss know nought of the matter,
Gascony girls or girls of Toulouse;
Two fishwives here with a half-hour's chatter
Would shut them up by threes and twos;
Calais, Lorraine, and all their crews,
(Names enow the mad song marries)
England and Picardy, search them and choose,
There's no good girl's lip out of Paris.
Prince, give praise to our French ladies
For the sweet sound their speaking carries;
'Twixt Rome and Cadiz many a maid is,
But no good girl's lip out of Paris.
At daybreak, when the falcon claps his wings,
No whit for grief, but noble heart and high,
With loud glad noise he stirs himself and springs,
And takes his meat and toward his lure draws nigh;
Such good I wish you! Yea, and heartily
I am fired with hope of true love's meed to get;
Know that Love writes it in his book; for why,
This is the end for which we twain are met.
Mine own heart's lady with no gainsayings
You shall be always wholly till I die;
And in my right against all bitter things
Sweet laurel with fresh rose its force shall try;
Seeing reason wills not that I cast love by
(Nor here with reason shall I chide or fret)
Nor cease to serve, but serve more constantly;
This is the end for which we twain are met.
And, which is more, when grief about me clings
Through Fortune's fit or fume of jealousy,
Your sweet kind eye beats down her threatenings
As wind doth smoke; such power sits in your eye.
Thus in your field my seed of harvestry
Thrives, for the fruit is like me that I set;
God bids me tend it with good husbandry;
This is the end for which we twain are met.
Princess, give ear to this my summary;
That heart of mine your heart's love should forget
Shall never be: like trust in you put I:
This is the end for which we twain are met.
May he fall in with beasts that scatter fire,
Like Jason, when he sought the fleece of gold,
Or change from man to beast three years entire,
As King Nebuchadnezzar did of old;
Or else have times as shameful and as bad
As Trojan folk for ravished Helen had;
Or gulfed with Proserpine and Tantalus
Let hell's deep fen devour him dolorous,
With worse to bear than Job's worst sufferance,
Bound in his prison-maze with Daedalus,
Who could wish evil to the state of France!
May he four months, like bitterns in the mire,
Howl with head downmost in the lake-springs cold,
Or to bear harness like strong bulls for hire
To the Great Turk for money down be sold;
Or thirty years like Magdalen live sad,
With neither wool nor web of linen clad;
Drown like Narciss', or swing down pendulous
Like Absalom with locks luxurious,
Or liker Judas fallen to reprobance;
Or find such death as Simon sorcerous,
Who could wish evil to the state of France!
May the old times come of fierce Octavian's ire,
And in his belly molten coin be told;
May he like Victor in the mill expire,
Crushed between moving millstones on him rolled,
Or in deep sea drenched breathless, more adrad
Than in the whale's bulk Jonas, when God bade:
From Phoebus' light, from Juno's treasure-house
Driven, and from joys of Venus amorous,
And cursed of God most high to the utterance,
As was the Syrian king Antiochus,
Who could wish evil to the state of France!
Prince, may the bright-winged brood of AEolus
To sea-king Glaucus' wild wood cavernous
Bear him bereft of peace and hope's least glance,
For worthless is he to get good of us,
Who could wish evil to the state of France.
Who is this I hear?--Lo, this is I, thine heart,
That holds on merely now by a slender string.
Strength fails me, shape and sense are rent apart,
The blood in me is turned to a bitter thing,
Seeing thee skulk here like a dog shivering.--
Yea, and for what?--For that thy sense found sweet.--
What irks it thee?--I feel the sting of it.--
Leave me at peace.--Why?--Nay now, leave me at peace;
I will repent when I grow ripe in wit.--
I say no more.--I care not though thou cease.--
What art thou, trow?--A man worth praise, perfay.--
This is thy thirtieth year of wayfaring.--
'Tis a mule's age.--Art thou a boy still?--Nay.--
Is it hot lust that spurs thee with its sting,
Grasping thy throat? Know'st thou not anything?--
Yea, black and white, when milk is specked with flies,
I can make out.--No more?--Nay, in no wise.
Shall I begin again the count of these?--
Thou art undone.--I will make shift to rise.--
I say no more.--I care not though thou cease.--
I have the sorrow of it, and thou the smart.
Wert thou a poor mad fool or weak of wit,
Then might'st thou plead this pretext with thine heart;
But if thou know not good from evil a whit,
Either thy head is hard as stone to hit,
Or shame, not honour, gives thee most content.
What canst thou answer to this argument?--
When I am dead I shall be well at ease.--
God! what good hope!--Thou art over eloquent.--
I say no more.--I care not though thou cease.--
Whence is this ill?--From sorrow and not from sin.
When Saturn packed my wallet up for me
I well believe he put these ills therein.--
Fool, wilt thou make thy servant lord of thee?
Hear now the wise king's counsel; thus saith he:
All power upon the stars a wise man hath;
There is no planet that shall do him scathe.--
Nay, as they made me I grow and I decrease.--
What say'st thou?--Truly this is all my faith.--
I say no more.--I care not though thou cease.--
Wouldst thou live still?--God help me that I may!--
Then thou must--What? turn penitent and pray?--
Read always--What?--Grave words and good to say;
Leave off the ways of fools, lest they displease.--
Good; I will do it.--Wilt thou remember?--Yea.--
Abide not till there come an evil day.
I say no more.--I care not though thou cease.
Have pity, pity, friends, have pity on me,
Thus much at least, may it please you, of your grace!
I lie not under hazel or hawthorn-tree
Down in this dungeon ditch, mine exile's place
By leave of God and fortune's foul disgrace.
Girls, lovers, glad young folk and newly wed,
Jumpers and jugglers, tumbling heel o'er head,
Swift as a dart, and sharp as needle-ware,
Throats clear as bells that ring the kine to shed,
Your poor old friend, what, will you leave him there?
Singers that sing at pleasure, lawlessly,
Light, laughing, gay of word and deed, that race
And run like folk light-witted as ye be
And have in hand nor current coin nor base,
Ye wait too long, for now he's dying apace.
Rhymers of lays and roundels sung and read,
Ye'll brew him broth too late when he lies dead.
Nor wind nor lightning, sunbeam nor fresh air,
May pierce the thick wall's bound where lies his bed;
Your poor old friend, what, will you leave him there?
O noble folk from tithes and taxes free,
Come and behold him in this piteous case,
Ye that nor king nor emperor holds in fee,
But only God in heaven; behold his face
Who needs must fast, Sundays and holidays,
Which makes his teeth like rakes; and when he hath fed
With never a cake for banquet but dry bread,
Must drench his bowels with much cold watery fare,
With board nor stool, but low on earth instead;
Your poor old friend, what, will you leave him there?
Princes afore-named, old and young foresaid,
Get me the king's seal and my pardon sped,
And hoist me in some basket up with care:
So swine will help each other ill bested,
For where one squeaks they run in heaps ahead.
Your poor old friend, what, will you leave him there?
Men, brother men, that after us yet live,
Let not your hearts too hard against us be;
For if some pity of us poor men ye give,
The sooner God shall take of you pity.
Here are we five or six strung up, you see,
And here the flesh that all too well we fed
Bit by bit eaten and rotten, rent and shred,
And we the bones grow dust and ash withal;
Let no man laugh at us discomforted,
But pray to God that he forgive us all.
If we call on you, brothers, to forgive,
Ye should not hold our prayer in scorn, though we
Were slain by law; ye know that all alive
Have not wit alway to walk righteously;
Make therefore intercession heartily
With him that of a virgin's womb was bred,
That his grace be not as a dry well-head
For us, nor let hell's thunder on us fall;
We are dead, let no man harry or vex us dead,
But pray to God that he forgive us all.
The rain has washed and laundered us all five,
And the sun dried and blackened; yea, perdie,
Ravens and pies with beaks that rend and rive
Have dug our eyes out, and plucked off for fee
Our beards and eyebrows; never are we free,
Not once, to rest; but here and there still sped,
Drive at its wild will by the wind's change led,
More pecked of birds than fruits on garden-wall;
Men, for God's love, let no gibe here be said,
But pray to God that he forgive us all.
Prince Jesus, that of all art lord and head,
Keep us, that hell be not our bitter bed;
We have nought to do in such a master's hall.
Be not ye therefore of our fellowhead,
But pray to God that he forgive us all.
Take heed of this small child of earth;
He is great: he hath in him God most high.
Children before their fleshly birth
Are lights alive in the blue sky.
In our light bitter world of wrong
They come; God gives us them awhile.
His speech is in their stammering tongue,
And his forgiveness in their smile.
Their sweet light rests upon our eyes.
Alas! their right to joy is plain.
If they are hungry, Paradise
Weeps, and, if cold, Heaven thrills with pain.
The want that saps their sinless flower
Speaks judgment on sin's ministers.
Man holds an angel in his power.
Ah! deep in Heaven what thunder stirs,
When God seeks out these tender things
Whom in the shadow where we sleep
He sends us clothed about with wings,
And finds them ragged babes that weep!
La nuit ecoute et se penche sur l'onde
Pour y cueillir rien qu'un souffle d'amour;
Pas de lueur, pas de musique au monde,
Pas de sommeil pour moi ni de sejour.
O mere, o Nuit, de ta source profonde
Verse-nous, verse enfin l'oubli du jour.
Verse l'oubli de l'angoisse et du jour;
Chante; ton chant assoupit l'ame et l'onde:
Fais de ton sein pour mon ame un sejour,
Elle est bien lasse, o mere, de ce monde,
Ou le baiser ne veut pas dire amour,
Ou l'ame aimee est moins que toi profonde.
Car toute chose aimee est moins profonde,
O Nuit, que toi, fille et mere du jour;
Toi dont l'attente est le repit du monde,
Toi dont le souffle est plein de mots d'amour,
Toi dont l'haleine enfle et reprime l'onde,
Toi dont l'ombre a tout le ciel pour sejour.
La misere humble et lasse, sans sejour,
S'abrite et dort sous ton aile profonde;
Tu fais a tous l'aumone de l'amour:
Toutes les soifs viennent boire a ton onde,
Tout ce qui pleure et se derobe au jour,
Toutes les faims et tous les maux du monde.
Moi seul je veille et ne vois dans ce monde
Que ma douleur qui n'ait point de sejour
Ou s'abriter sur ta rive profonde
Et s'endormir sous tes yeux loin du jour;
Je vais toujours cherchant au bord de l'onde
Le sang du beau pied blesse de l'amour.
La mer est sombre ou tu naquis, amour,
Pleine des pleurs et des sanglots du monde;
On ne voit plus le gouffre ou nait le jour
Luire et fremir sous ta lueur profonde;
Mais dans les coeurs d'homme ou tu fais sejour
La douleur monte et baisse comme une onde.
Fille de l'onde et mere de l'amour,
Du haut sejour plein de ta paix profonde
Sur ce bas monde epands un peu de jour.
Pour mettre une couronne au front d'une chanson,
Il semblait qu'en passant son pied semat des roses,
Et que sa main cueillit comme des fleurs ecloses
Les etoiles au fond du ciel en floraison.
Sa parole de marbre et d'or avait le son
Des clairons de l'ete chassant les jours moroses;
Comme en Thrace Apollon banni des grands cieux roses,
Il regardait du coeur l'Olympe, sa maison.
Le soleil fut pour lui le soleil du vieux monde,
Et son oeil recherchait dans les flots embrases
Le sillon immortel d'ou s'elanca sur l'onde
Venus, que la mer molle enivrait de baisers:
Enfin, dieu ressaisi de sa splendeur premiere,
Il trone, et son sepulcre est bati de lumiere.
Quelle fleur, o Mort, quel joyau, quel chant,
Quel vent, quel rayon de soleil couchant,
Sur ton front penche, sur ta main avide,
Sur l'apre paleur de ta levre aride,
Vibre encore et luit?
Ton sein est sans lait, ton oreille est vide,
Ton oeil plein de nuit.
Ta bouche est sans souffle et ton front sans ride;
Mais l'eclair voile d'une flamme humide,
Flamme eclose au coeur d'un ciel pluvieux,
Rallume ta levre et remplit tes yeux
De lueurs d'opale;
Ta bouche est vermeille et ton front joyeux,
O toi qui fus pale.
Comme aux jours divins la mere des dieux,
Reine au sein fecond, au corps radieux,
Tu surgis au bord de la tombe amere;
Tu nous apparais, o Mort, vierge et mere,
Effroi des humains,
Le divin laurier sur la tete altiere
Et la lyre aux mains.
Nous reconnaissons, courbes vers la terre,
Que c'est la splendeur de ta face austere
Qui dore la nuit de nos longs malheurs;
Que la vie ailee aux mille couleurs,
Dont tu n'es que l'ame,
Refait par tes mains les pres et les fleurs,
La rose et la femme.
Lune constante! astre ami des douleurs
Qui luis a travers la brume des pleurs!
Quelle flamme au fond de ta clarte molle
Eclate et rougit, nouvelle aureole,
Ton doux front voile?
Quelle etoile, ouvrant ses ailes, s'envole
Du ciel etoile?
Pleurant ce rayon de jour qu'on lui vole,
L'homme execre en vain la Mort triste et folle;
Mais l'astre qui fut a nos yeux si beau,
La-haut, loin d'ici, dans un ciel nouveau
Plein d'autres etoiles,
Se leve, et pour lui la nuit du tombeau
Entr'ouvre ses voiles.
L'ame est dans le corps comme un jeune oiseau
Dont l'aile s'agite au bord du berceau;
La mort, deliant cette aile inquiete,
Quand nous ecoutons la bouche muette
Qui nous dit adieu,
Fait de l'homme infime et sombre un poete,
Du poete un dieu.
O lux Pieridum et laurigeri deliciae dei,
Vox leni Zephyro lenior, ut veris amans novi
Tollit floridulis implicitum primitiis caput,
Ten' ergo abripuit non rediturum, ut redeunt novo
Flores vere novi, te quoque mors irrevocabilem?
Cur vatem neque te Musa parens, te neque Gratiae,
Nec servare sibi te potuit fidum animi Venus?
Quae nunc ipsa magis vel puero te Cinyreio,
Te desiderium et flebilibus lumen amoribus,
Amissum queritur, sanguineis fusa comam genis.
Tantis tu lacrymis digne, comes dulcis Apollini,
Carum nomen eris dis superis atque sodalibus
Nobis, quis eadem quae tibi vivo patuit via
Non aequis patet, at te sequimur passibus haud tuis,
At maesto cinerem carmine non illacrymabilem
Tristesque exuvias floribus ac fletibus integris
Una contegimus, nec cithara nec sine tibia,
Votoque unanimae vocis Ave dicimus et Vale.
Catulle frater, ut velim comes tibi
Remota per vireta, per cavum nemus
Sacrumque Ditis haud inhospiti specus,
Pedem referre, trans aquam Stygis ducem
Secutus unum et unicum, Catulle, te,
Ut ora vatis optimi reviserem,
Tui meique vatis ora, quem scio
Venustiorem adisse vel tuo lacum,
Benigniora semper arva vel tuis,
Ubi serenus accipit suos deus,
Tegitque myrtus implicata laurea,
Manuque mulcet halituque consecrat
Fovetque blanda mors amabili sinu,
Et ore fama fervido colit viros
Alitque qualis unus ille par tibi
Britannus unicusque in orbe praestitit
Amicus ille noster, ille ceteris
Poeta major, omnibusque floribus
Priore Landor inclytum rosa caput
Revinxit extulitque, quam tua manu
Recepit ac refovit integram sua.
Some nine years gone, as we dwelt together
In the sweet hushed heat of the south French weather
Ere autumn fell on the vine-tressed hills
Or the season had shed one rose-red feather,
Friend, whose fame is a flame that fills
All eyes it lightens and hearts it thrills
With joy to be born of the blood which bred
From a land that the grey sea girds and chills
The heart and spirit and hand and head
Whose might is as light on a dark day shed,
On a day now dark as a land's decline
Where all the peers of your praise are dead,
In a land and season of corn and vine
I pledged you a health from a beaker of mine
But halfway filled to the lip's edge yet
With hope for honey and song for wine.
Nine years have risen and eight years set
Since there by the wellspring our hands on it met:
And the pledge of my songs that were then to be,
I could wonder not, friend, though a friend should forget.
For life's helm rocks to the windward and lee,
And time is as wind, and as waves are we;
And song is as foam that the sea-winds fret,
Though the thought at its heart should be deep as the sea.