Exiles my present ioy,
And wit me warnes to shun such snares
As threaten mine annoy.
By course of changed windes.
The toppe of hope supposed,
The roote of ruthe wil be,
As shortly ye shall see.
Then dazeld eyes with pride,
Which great ambition blinds,
Shalbe vnseeld by worthy wights,
Hath taught stil peace to growe.
Shall ancre in this port,
Let them elsewhere resort.
Our rusty sworde with rest,
To polle their toppes, that seeke such change
of Elizabeth's preserved by Puttenham (p. 197) "which (says he) our
soveraigne lady wrote in defiance of fortune."
"Never thinke you, Fortune can beare the sway,
Where Vertue's force can cause her to obay."
The slightest effusion of such a mind deserves attention.
are other variations, that seem meer mistakes of the transcriber or
printer.
This ballad is a proof of the little intercourse that subsisted between
the Scots and English, before the accession of James I. to the crown of
England. The tale which is here so circumstantially related does not
appear to have had the least foundation in history, but was probably
built upon some confused hearsay report of the tumults in Scotland
during the minority of that prince, and of the conspiracies formed by
different factions to get possession of his person. It should seem from
ver. 97 to have been written during the regency, or at least before the
death, of the earl of Morton, who was condemned and executed June 2,
The original copy (preserved in the archives of the Antiquarian
Society, London) is intitled, _A new Ballad, declaring the great
treason conspired against the young king of Scots, and how one Andrew
Browne an Englishman, which was the king's chamberlaine, prevented
the same. To the tune of Milfield, or els to Green-sleeves._ At the
end is subjoined the name of the author "W. Elderton. Imprinted at
London for Yarathe James, dwelling in Newgate Market, over against Ch.
Church," in black-letter, folio.
This _Elderton_, who had been originally an attorney in the sheriffs'
courts of London, and afterwards (if we may believe Oldys) a comedian,
was a facetious fuddling companion, whose tippling and rhymes rendered
him famous among his contemporaries. He was author of many popular
songs and ballads: and probably other pieces in these volumes, besides
the following, are of his composing. He is believed to have fallen
a victim to his bottle before the year 1592. His epitaph has been
recorded by Camden, and translated by Oldys:--
"Hic situs est sitiens, atque ebrius Eldertonus,
Quid dico hic situs est? hic potius sitis est,"
"Dead drunk here Elderton doth lie;
Dead as he is, he still is dry:
So of him it may well be said,
Here he, but not his thirst, is laid."
among Beaumont's _Poems_, 8vo. 1653.
Percy does not mention in the above note the fact that the ballad
is included in the Folio MS., where it is entitled _Bishoppe and_
_Browne_ (ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. ii. p. 265). It only
consists of ten stanzas in place of fifteen, and two of them are
incomplete. There is a sort of second part, probably also by
Elderton, called _King James and Brown_, in the MS. (vol. i. p.
Out alas!' what a griefe is this
That princes subjects cannot be true,
But still the devill hath some of his,
Will play their parts whatsoever ensue;
It is to offend the anointed king?
Alas for woe, why should it be so,
This makes a sorrowful heigh ho.
In Scotland is a bonnie kinge,
Well given to every happy thing,
That can be in a kinge to see:
Yet that unluckie country still,
Hath people given to craftie will.
On Whitsun eve it so befell,
A posset was made to give the king,
Whereof his ladie nurse hard tell,
And that it was a poysoned thing:
Now help, or els the king shall die!
Alas for woe, &c.
One Browne, that was an English man,
And hard the ladies piteous crye,
Out with his sword, and bestir'd him than,                        25
Out of the doores in haste to flie;
But all the doores were made so fast,
Out of a window he got at last
Alas for woe, &c.
He met the bishop coming fast,                                    30
Having the posset in his hande:
The sight of Browne made him aghast,
Who bad him stoutly staie and stand.
With him were two that ranne awa,
For feare that Browne would make a fray.                          35
Alas for woe, &c.
Bishop, quoth Browne, what hast thou there?
Nothing at all, my friend, sayde he;
But a posset to make the king good cheere.
Is it so? sayd Browne, that will I see,                         40
First I will have thyself begin,
Before thou go any further in;
Be it weale or woe, it shall be so,
This makes a sorrowful heigh ho.
The bishop sayde, Browne I doo know,                              45
Thou art a young man poore and bare;
Livings on thee I will bestowe:
Let me go on, take thou no care.
No, no, quoth Browne, I will not be
A traitour for all Christiantie:                                  50
Happe well or woe, it shall be so,
Drink now with a sorrowfull, &c.
The bishop dranke, and by and by
His belly burst and he fell downe:
A just rewarde for his traitery.                                  55
This was a posset indeed, quoth Brown!
He serched the bishop, and found the keyes,
To come to the kinge when he did please.
Alas for woe, &c.
As soon as the king got word of this,                             60
He humbly fell uppon his knee,
And praysed God that he did misse
To tast of that extremity:
For that he did perceive and know,
His clergie would betray him so:                                  65
Alas for woe, &c.
My father, and grandfather slaine:
My mother banished, O extreame!
Unhappy fate, and bitter bayne!                                 70
And now like treason wrought for me,
What more unhappie realme can be!
Alas for woe, &c.
The king did call his nurse to his grace,
And gave her twenty poundes a yeere;                            75
And trustie Browne too in like case,
He knighted him with gallant geere;
And gave him 'lands and' livings great,
For dooing such a manly feat,
As he did showe, to the bishop's woe,                       80
Which made, &c.
When all this treason done and past,
Tooke not effect of traytery;
Another treason at the last,
They sought against his majestie:                               85
How they might make their kinge away,
Alas for woe, &c.
'Another time' to sell the king
Beyonde the seas they had decreede:                             90
Three noble Earles heard of this thing.
And did prevent the same with speede.
For a letter came, with such a charme,
That they should doo their king no harme:
For further woe, if they did soe,                           95
Would make a sorrowful heigh hoe.
The Earle Mourton told the Douglas then,
Take heede you do not offend the king;
But shew yourselves like honest men
Obediently in every thing:                                     100
Her noble childe misus'd to be
With any woe; for if it be so,
She will make, &c.
God graunt all subjects may be true,                             105
In England, Scotland, every where:
That no such daunger may ensue,
To put the prince or state in feare:
That God the highest king may see
Obedience as it ought to be,                                     110
In wealth or woe, God graunt it be so
To avoide the sorrowful heigh ho.
old Earl of Lenox, regent of Scotland, and father of Lord Darnley, was
murdered at Stirling, Sept. 5, 1571.
In December, 1591, Francis Stewart, Earl of Bothwell, had made an
attempt to seize on the person of his sovereign James VI., but being
disappointed, had retired towards the north. The king unadvisedly gave
a commission to George Gordon Earl of Huntley, to pursue Bothwell and
his followers with fire and sword. Huntley, under cover of executing
that commission, took occasion to revenge a private quarrel he had
against James Stewart Earl of Murray, a relation of Bothwell's. In
the night of Feb. 7, 1592, he beset Murray's house, burnt it to the
ground, and slew Murray himself; a young nobleman of the most promising
virtues, and the very darling of the people. See Robertson's _Hist._
The present Lord Murray hath now in his possession a picture of his
ancestor naked and covered with wounds, which had been carried about,
according to the custom of that age, in order to inflame the populace
to revenge his death. If this picture did not flatter, he well deserved
the name of the _bonny Earl_, for he is there represented as a tall
and comely personage. It is a tradition in the family, that Gordon of
Bucky gave him a wound in the face: Murray half expiring, said, "You
hae spilt a better face than your awin." Upon this, Bucky pointing his
dagger at Huntley's breast, swore, "You shall be as deep as I;" and
forced him to pierce the poor defenceless body.
K. James, who took no care to punish the murtherers, is said by some
to have privately countenanced and abetted them, being stimulated by
jealousy for some indiscreet praises which his Queen had too lavishly
bestowed on this unfortunate youth. See the preface to the next ballad.
See also Mr. Walpole's _Catalogue of Royal Auth._ vol. i. p. 42.
earldom of Murray by his marriage with Elizabeth, eldest daughter
and heiress of the Regent Murray. The earl was only twenty-one
years of age at the time of his murder, which was perpetrated at
Dinnibrissel, the seat of his mother, where he was on a visit.
Doune Castle in Menteith is now in ruins, but it is still the
property of the family, and gives the title of Viscount to the
eldest son of the Earl of Murray. The Earl of Huntley, instead of
being punished for his crime, was created a marquis, and King James
made the young earl of Murray marry the eldest daughter of his
father's murderer.
There is another version of this ballad given in Finlay's
_Scottish Ballads_ (ii. 21), which commences--
"Open the gates
And let him come in;
He is my brother Huntly,
He'll do me nae harm."
The author of this seems to have supposed that Murray married a
Ye highlands, and ye lawlands,
Oh! quhair hae ye been?
They hae slaine the Earl of Murray,
And hae laid him on the green.
Now wae be to thee, Huntley!                                       5
And quhairfore did you sae!
I bade you bring him wi' you,
But forbade you him to slay.
He was a braw gallant,
And he rid at the ring;                                         10
And the bonny Earl of Murray,
Oh! he might hae been a king.
He was a braw gallant,
And he playd at the ba';
And the bonny Earl of Murray                                      15
Was the flower among them a'.
He was a braw gallant,
And he playd at the gluve;
And the bonny Earl of Murray,
Oh! he was the Queenes luve.                                    20
Oh! lang will his lady
Ere she see the Earl of Murray
Cum sounding throw the towne.
Downe_, a seat belonging to the family of Murray.
It has been suggested to the Editor, that this ballad covertly alludes
to the indiscreet partiality, which Q. Anne of Denmark is said to have
shewn for the _bonny Earl of Murray_; and which is supposed to have
influenced the fate of that unhappy nobleman. Let the reader judge for
himself.
The following account of the murder is given by a contemporary writer,
and a person of credit, Sir James Balfour, knight, Lyon King of Arms,
whose MS. of the Annals of Scotland is in the Advocates library at
Edinburgh.
"The seventh of Febry, this yeire, 1592, the Earle of Murray was
cruelly murthered by the Earle of Huntley at his house in Dunibrissel
out and publickly talked, that the Earle of Huntley was only the
instrument of perpetrating this facte, to satisfie the King's jealousie
of Murray, quhum the Queine more rashely than wyslie, some few dayes
before had commendit in the King's heiringe, with too many epithets
of a proper and gallant man. The reasons of these surmises proceidit
from proclamatione of the Kings, the 18 of Marche following; inhibiting
the younge Earle of Murray to persue the Earle of Huntley, for his
castell of Blacknesse for the same murther, was willing to abide his
tryall, averring that he had done nothing bot by the King's majesties
The following ballad is here given from a copy printed not long
since at Glasgow, in one sheet 8vo. The world was indebted for its
publication to the lady Jean Hume, sister to the Earl of Hume, who died
stanzas, believed young Waters to have been David Graham of
Fintray, who was found guilty of being concerned in a Popish plot,
and beheaded on the 16th of February, 1592. Chambers supposed that
the fate of some one of the Scottish nobles executed by James I.
after his return from captivity in England is alluded to. The
various conflicting conjectures are none of them very probable, and
there is nothing in the ballad that would conclusively connect it
with authentic Scottish history. Percy's suggestion is peculiarly
unfortunate, as young Waters was publicly executed at Stirling. Mr.
Maidment points out (_Scottish Ballads and Songs_, vol. i. p. 62)
that the first edition appeared under the following title, _Young_
_Waters, an Ancient Scotish Poem, never before printed. Glasgow:_
_printed and sold by Robert and Andrew Foulis, MDCCLV._ sm. 4to.
About Yule, quhen the wind blew cule,
And the round tables began,
A'! there is cum to our kings court
Mony a well-favourd man.
The queen luikt owre the castle wa,                                5
Beheld baith dale and down,
And then she saw young Waters
Cum riding to the town.
His footmen they did rin before,
His horsemen rade behind,                                       10
Ane mantel of the burning gowd
Did keip him frae the wind.
And siller shod behind,
The horse yong Waters rade upon                                   15
Was fleeter than the wind.
But then spake a wylie lord,
Unto the queen said he,
O tell me quha's the fairest face
Rides in the company.                                           20
I've sene lord, and I've sene laird,
And knights of high degree;
Bot a fairer face than young Waters
Mine eyne did never see.
Out then spack the jealous king,                                  25
(And an angry man was he)
O, if he had been twice as fair,
You micht have excepted me.
You're neither laird nor lord, she says,
Bot the king that wears the crown;                              30
Ther is not a knight in fair Scotland
Bot to thee maun bow down.
For a' that she could do or say,
Appeasd he wad nae bee;
Bot for the words which she had said                              35
Young Waters he maun dee.
They hae taen young Waters, and
Put fetters to his feet;
They hae taen young Waters, and
Thrown him in dungeon deep.                                     40
Aft I have ridden thro' Stirling town
In the wind both and the weit;
Bot I neir rade thro' Stirling town
Wi fetters at my feet.
Aft have I ridden thro' Stirling town                             45
In the wind both and the rain;
Bot I neir rade thro' Stirling town
Neir to return again.
His young son in his craddle,                                   50
And they hae taen to the heiding-hill,
His horse both and his saddle.
They hae taen to the heiding-hill
His lady fair to see.
And for the words the Queen had spoke,                            55
Young Waters he did dee.
execution was anciently an artificial hillock.
In the year 1584, the Spaniards, under the command of Alexander
Farnese, prince of Parma, began to gain great advantages in Flanders
and Brabant, by recovering many strong holds and cities from the
Hollanders, as Ghent, (called then by the English _Gaunt_,) Antwerp,
Mechlin, &c. See Stow's _Annals_, p. 711. Some attempt made with the
assistance of English volunteers to retrieve the former of those places
probably gave occasion to this ballad. I can find no mention of our
heroine in history, but the following rhymes rendered her famous among
our poets. Ben Jonson often mentions her, and calls any remarkable
sc. 2. His _Tale of a Tub_, act i. sc. 2. And his masque intitled the
_Fortunate Isles_, 1626, where he quotes the very words of the ballad,
----"_Mary Ambree_,
(Who marched so free
To the siege of Gaunt,
And death could not daunt,
As the ballad doth vaunt)
Were a braver wight, &c."
She is also mentioned in Fletcher's _Scornful Lady_, act v. _sub
finem_.
----"My large gentlewoman, my _Mary Ambree_, had I but seen into you,
you should have had another bed-fellow."----
It is likewise evident, that she is the virago intended by Butler in
_Hudibras_ (p. i. c. iii. v. 365), by her being coupled with _Joan
d'Arc_, the celebrated _Pucelle d'Orleans_.
"A bold virago stout and tall
As _Joan_ of France, or English _Mall_."
This ballad is printed from a black letter copy in the Pepys
Collection, improved from the Editor's folio MS. and by conjecture.
The full title is, _The valorous acts performed at Gaunt by the brave
bonnie lass Mary Ambree, who in revenge of her lovers death did play
her part most gallantly_. The tune is, _The blind beggar, &c._
When captain's couragious, whom death cold not daunte,
Did march to the siege of the citty of Gaunt,
They mustred their souldiers by two and by three,
And the formost in battle was Mary Ambree.
Who was her true lover, her joy, and delight,
Because he was slaine most treacherouslie,
Then vowd to revenge him Mary Ambree.
She clothed herselfe from the top to the toe
In buffe of the bravest, most seemelye to showe;                  10
Was not this a brave bonny lass, Mary Ambree?
A helmett of proofe shee strait did provide,
A strong arminge sword shee girt by her side,
On her hand a goodly faire gauntlett put shee;                    15
Was not this a brave bonny lass, Mary Ambree?
Then tooke shee her sworde and her targett in hand,
Bidding all such, as wold, bee of her band;
To wayte on her person came thousand and three:
Was not this a brave bonny lass, Mary Ambree?                     20
My soldiers, she saith, soe valiant and bold,
Nowe followe your captaine, whom you doe beholde;
Still foremost in battel myselfe will I bee:
Was not this a brave bonny lasse, Mary Ambree?
Then cryed out her souldiers, and loude they did say,             25
Soe well thou becomest this gallant array,
Thy harte and thy weapons soe well do agree,
There was none ever like Mary Ambree.
Shee cheared her souldiers, that foughten for life,
With ancyent and standard, with drum and with fyfe,               30
With brave clanging trumpetts, that sounded so free;
Was not this a brave bonny lasse, Mary Ambree?
Before I will see the worst of you all
To come into danger of death, or of thrall,
This hand and this life I will venture so free:                   35
Was not this a brave bonny lasse, Mary Ambree?
Shee led upp her souldiers in battaile array,
Gainst three times theyr number by breake of the daye;
Seven howers in skirmish continued shee:
Was not this a brave bonny lasse, Mary Ambree?                    40
She filled the skyes with the smoke of her shott,
And her enemyes bodyes with bullets soe hott;
For one of her owne men a score killed shee:
Was not this a brave bonny lasse, Mary Ambree?
And when her false gunner, to spoyle her intent,                  45
Away all her pellets and powder had sent,
Straight with her keen weapon shee slasht him in three:
Was not this a brave bonny lasse, Mary Ambree?
Being falselye betrayed for lucre of hyre,
At length she was forced to make a retyre;                        50
Then her souldiers into a strong castle drew shee:
Was not this a brave bonny lasse, Mary Ambree?
Her foes they besett her on everye side,
As thinking close siege shee cold never abide;
To beate down the walles they all did decree:                     55
But stoutlye deffyd them brave Mary Ambree.
Then tooke shee her sword and her targett in hand,
And mounting the walls all undaunted did stand,
There daring their captaines to match any three:
O what a brave captaine was Mary Ambree!                          60
Now saye, English captaine, what woldest thou give
To ransome thy selfe, which else must not live?
Come yield thy selfe quicklye, or slaine thou must bee.
Then smiled sweetlye brave Mary Ambree.
Ye captaines couragious, of valour so bold,                       65
Whom thinke you before you now you doe behold?
A knight, sir, of England, and captaine soe free,
Who shortelye with us a prisoner must bee.
No captaine of England; behold in your sight
Two brests in my bosome, and therfore no knight:                  70
Noe knight, sirs, of England, nor captaine you see,
But a poor simple lass, called Mary Ambree.
But art thou a woman, as thou dost declare,
Whose valor hath provd so undaunted in warre?
If England doth yield such brave lasses as thee,                  75
Full well may they conquer, faire Mary Ambree.
The prince of Great Parma heard of her renowne,
Who long had advanced for Englands faire crowne;
Hee wooed her and sued her his mistress to bee,
And offerd rich presents to Mary Ambree.                          80
But this virtuous mayden despised them all,
Ile nere sell my honour for purple nor pall:
A mayden of England, sir, never will bee
The whore of a monarcke, quoth Mary Ambree.
Then to her owne country shee backe did returne,                  85
Still holding the foes of faire England in scorne:
Therfore English captaines of every degree
Sing forth the brave valours of Mary Ambree.
edition of the folio MS. vol. i. p. 516.
Captaine couragious, whome death cold daunte,
beseeged the Citye brauelye, the citty of Gaunt!
they mustered their soliders by 2 & by 3:
& the fformost in Battele was Mary Aumbree!                        4
When braue Sir Iohn Maior was slaine in that fight,
that was her true louer, her Ioy & delight,
shee swore his death vnreuenged shold not bee;
was not this a braue, bonye lasse, Mary Aumbree?                   8
The death of her trueloue shee meant to requite
which lately was slaine most villanouslye;
was not this a braue, bonnye Lasse, Mary Aumbree?                 12
Shee cladd her selfe from the top to the toe
in buffe of the brauest most seemlye to show,
& a faire shirt of Male slipped on shee;
was not this a braue, bonye lasse, Mary Aumbree?                  16
A helmett of proofe shee tooke on her head,
& a strong arminge sword shee wore by her side;
a goodly fayre gauntlett on her hand put shee;
was not this a braue, bonye lasse, Mary Aumbree?                  20
Shee tooke her sword & her targett in hand,
bidding all such as wold, wayte on her band.
to waite on her person there came 1000^{ds} 3:
was not this a braue, bonye lasse, Mary Aumbree?                  24
"My soldiers," shee saith, "soe valiant and bold,
now ffollow your Captain which you doe beholde;
in the fight formost my selfe will I bee!"
was not this a braue, bonye lasse, Mary Aumbree?                  28
Then cryed out her souldiers, & loude the did say,
"soe well thou becomes this gallant array,
thy hands & thy weapons doe well soe agree,
there was neuer none like to Mary Aumbree!"                       32
Shee cheared her good souldiers that foughten for life,
with the cominge of Ancyents, with drum & with fife,
that braue sonding trumpetts with ingines soe free,
att last the made mention of Mary Aumbree.                        36
"Before that I doe see the worst of you all
come in the danger of your enemyes thrall,
this hand & this sword shall first sett him free;"
was not this a braue bonye lasse, Mary Aumbree?                   40
Shee forward went on in Battaile array,
& straight shee did make her foes flye away;
was not this a braue bonye lasse, Mary Aumbree?                   44
The skyes shee did fill with the smoke of her shott,
in her enemies bodyes with bulletts soe hott;
for one of her owne men, a sckore killed shee;
was not this a braue bonye lasse, Mary Aumbree?                   48
Then did her gunner spoyle her intent,
pelletts & powder away had he sent:
then with her sword shee cutt him in 3,
was not this a braue bonye lasse, Mary Aumbree?                   52
Then was shee caused to make a retyre,
being falsely betrayd, as itt doth appeare;
then to saue her selfe into a castle went shee;
was not this a braue bonye lasse, Mary Aumbree?                   56
Her foes the besett her on euerye side,
thinking in that castle shee wold not abyde;
to beate downe those walls they all did agree;
was not that a braue bonye lasse, Mary Aumbree?                   60
She tooke her sword & her targett in hand,
shee came to the walls, and vpon them did stand,
their daring their Captaine to match any 3,
was not that a braue bonye lasse, Mary Aumbree?                   64
"Thou English Captain, what woldest thou giue
to ransome thy liffe which else must not liue?
come downe quickly, & yeeld thee to mee!"
then smiled sweetlye Mary Aumbree;                                68
"Good gentle Captain, what thinke you by mee,
or whom in my likenesse you take mee to bee?"
"a knight, sir, of England, & Captain soe free,
that I meane to take away prisoner with me."                      72
"Good gentle Captain, behold in your sight
noe knight, Sir, of England, nor Captain soe free,
"If thou beest a woman as thou dost declare,
that hast mangled our soliders, & made them soe bare;
the like in my liffe I neuer did see;
therfore Ile honor thee, Mary Aumbree."                           80
"Giue I be a woman, as well thou doest see,
Captain, thou gettst noe redemption of mee
without thou wilt fight with blowes 2 or 3."
was not this a braue bonye lasse, Mary Aumbree?                   84
God send in warrs, such euent I abide,
god send such a solider to stand by my side!
then safely preserued my person wilbe;
worn under the cloaths. It is mentioned by Spencer, who speaks of the
Irish Gallowglass or Foot-soldier as "armed in a long Shirt of Mayl."
(_View of the State of Ireland._)
Peregrine Bertie, lord Willoughby of Eresby, had, in the year 1586,
distinguished himself at the siege of Zutphen, in the Low Countries.
He was the year after made general of the English forces in the
United Provinces, in room of the earl of Leicester, who was recalled.
This gave him an opportunity of signalizing his courage and military
skill in several actions against the Spaniards. One of these, greatly
exaggerated by popular report, is probably the subject of this old
ballad, which, on account of its flattering encomiums on English
valour, hath always been a favourite with the people.
"My lord Willoughbie (says a contemporary writer) was one of the
queenes best swordsmen: ... he was a great master of the art
military ... I have heard it spoken, that had he not slighted the
court, but applied himself to the queene, he might have enjoyed a
plentifull portion of her grace; and it was his saying, and it did him
no good, that he was none of the _Reptilia_; intimating, that he could
not creepe on the ground, and that the court was not his element; for
indeed, as he was a great souldier, so he was of suitable magnanimitie,
and could not brooke the obsequiousnesse and assiduitie of the courte."
(_Naunton._)
Lord Willoughbie died in 1601.--Both Norris and Turner were famous
among the military men of that age.
The subject of this ballad (which is printed from an old black-letter
copy, with some conjectural emendations,) may possibly receive
illustration from what _Chapman_ says in the Dedicat. to his version of
Homer's _Frogs and Mice_, concerning the brave and memorable Retreat
of Sir John Norris, with only 1000 men, thro' the whole Spanish army,
under the duke of Parma, for three miles together.
Willoughby of Eresby and widow of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk,
and of her second husband, Richard Bertie. They were protestants
and were forced to fly from persecution in 1553, taking refuge
first in the Low Countries and afterwards in Poland. They called
their son in consequence Peregrine, a name that has ever since
remained in the family. Mr. Hales has drawn my attention to the
fact that Spenser, when in Ireland, named one of his sons Peregrine
for a similar reason. A ballad was written entitled _The Duchess
of Suffolk's Calamity_, which contains these lines:
"A sonne she had in Germanie,
Peregrine Bartue cald by name,
Surnamde The Good Lord Willobie,
Of courage great and worthie fame."
Mr. Chappell informs us that the tune of the following ballad
occurs in Lady Neville's Virginal Book (MS. 1591), and in
Robinson's _School of Music_ (1603), where it is called "Lord
The fifteenth day of July,
With glistering spear and shield,
A famous fight in Flanders
Was foughten in the field:
The most couragious officers                                       5
Were English captains three;
But the bravest man in battel
Was brave lord Willoughbey.
The next was captain Norris,
A valiant man was hee:                                          10
The other captain Turner,
From field would never flee.
With fifteen hundred fighting men,
Alas! there were no more,
They fought with fourteen thousand then,                          15
Upon the bloody shore.
Stand to it noble pikemen,
And look you round about:
And shoot you right you bow-men,
And we will keep them out:                                      20
Do you prove true to me,
I'le be the formost man in fight,
Says brave lord Willoughbey.
And then the bloody enemy                                         25
They fiercely did assail,
And fought it out most furiously,
Not doubting to prevail;
The wounded men on both sides fell
Most pitious for to see,                                        30
Yet nothing could the courage quell
Of brave lord Willoughbey.
For seven hours to all mens view
This fight endured sore,
Until our men so feeble grew                                      35
That they could fight no more;
And then upon dead horses
Full savourly they eat,
And drank the puddle water,
They could no better get.                                       40
When they had fed so freely,
They kneeled on the ground,
And praised God devoutly
For the favour they had found;
And beating up their colours,                                     45
The fight they did renew,
And turning tow'rds the Spaniard,
A thousand more they slew.
The sharp steel-pointed arrows,
And bullets thick did fly;                                      50
Then did our valiant soldiers
Charge on most furiously;
Which made the Spaniards waver,
They thought it best to flee,
They fear'd the stout behaviour                                   55
Of brave lord Willoughbey.
Then quoth the Spanish general,
Come let us march away,
I fear we shall be spoiled all
If here we longer stay;                                         60
For yonder comes lord Willoughbey
With courage fierce and fell,
He will not give one inch of way
For all the devils in hell.
And then the fearful enemy                                        65
Was quickly put to flight,
Our men persued couragiously,
And caught their forces quite;
But at last they gave a shout,
Which ecchoed through the sky,                                  70
God, and St. George for England!
The conquerers did cry.
This news was brought to England
With all the speed might be,
And soon our gracious queen was told                              75
Of this same victory.
O this is brave lord Willoughbey,
My love that ever won,
Of all the lords of honour
'Tis he great deeds hath done.                                  80
To the souldiers that were maimed,
And wounded in the fray,
The queen allowed a pension
Of fifteen pence a day;
And from all costs and charges                                    85
She quit and set them free:
And this she did all for the sake
Of brave lord Willoughbey.
Then courage, noble Englishmen,
And never be dismaid;                                           90
If that we be but one to ten,
We will not be afraid
To fight with foraign enemies,
And set our nation free.
And thus I end the bloody bout                                    95
Of brave lord Willoughbey.
This little moral sonnet hath such a pointed application to the heroes
of the foregoing and following ballads, that I cannot help placing it
here, tho' the date of its composition is of a much later period. It
is extracted from _Cupid and Death, a masque by J. S. (James Shirley)
presented Mar._ 26, 1653. _London printed 1653, 4to._
Military Ground in Leicester Fields, with music by Matthew Locke
Victorious men of earth, no more
Proclaim how wide your empires are;
Though you binde in every shore,
And your triumphs reach as far
As night or day;                             5
Yet you proud monarchs must obey,
And mingle with forgotten ashes, when
Death calls yee to the croud of common men.
Devouring famine, plague, and war,
Each able to undo mankind,                                      10
Death's servile emissaries are;
Nor to these alone confin'd,
He hath at will
More quaint and subtle wayes to kill;
A smile or kiss, as he will use the art,                          15
Shall have the cunning skill to break a heart.
The subject of this ballad is the taking of the city of _Cadiz_,
(called by our sailors corruptly _Cales_) on June 21, 1596, in a
descent made on the coast of Spain, under the command of the Lord
Howard admiral, and the earl of Essex general.
The valour of Essex was not more distinguished on this occasion than
his generosity: the town was carried sword in hand, but he stopt the
slaughter as soon as possible, and treated his prisoners with the
greatest humanity, and even affability and kindness. The English
made a rich plunder in the city, but missed of a much richer, by the
resolution which the Duke of Medina, the Spanish admiral, took, of
setting fire to the ships, in order to prevent their falling into the
the Spaniards sustained from this enterprize, amounted to twenty
millions of ducats. See Hume's _Hist_.
The Earl of Essex knighted on this occasion not fewer than sixty
persons, which gave rise to the following sarcasm:
"A gentleman of Wales, a knight of Cales,
And a laird of the North country;
But a yeoman of Kent with his yearly rent
Will buy them out all three."
The ballad is printed, with some corrections, from the Editor's folio
MS. and seems to have been composed by some person, who was concerned
in the expedition. Most of the circumstances related in it will be
found supported by history.
before he could set his schemes in motion his strongest fortress
was razed to the ground. Macaulay calls this "the most brilliant
military exploit that was achieved on the continent by English
arms during the long interval which elapsed between the battle of
Agincourt and that of Blenheim." No wonder then that the English
sang with enthusiasm of the glories of their success. Raleigh and
Sir Francis Vere were among the leaders under Essex.
It will be seen by the foot notes that Percy follows his MS.
original pretty faithfully. Child prints a version from Deloney's
_Garland of Goodwill_ as reprinted by the Percy Society (vol. xxx.
p. 113). The earliest notice of the tune (the new Tantara) to which
Long the proud Spaniards had vaunted to conquer us,
Threatning our country with fyer and sword;
Often preparing their navy most sumptuous
With as great plenty as Spain could afford.
Dub a dub, dub a dub, thus strike their drums;
To the seas presentlye went our lord admiral,
With knights couragious and captains full good;
The brave Earl of Essex, a prosperous general,
With him prepared to pass the salt flood.                       10
Dub a dub, &c.
At Plymouth speedilye, took they ship valiantlye,
Braver ships never were seen under sayle,
With their fair colours spread, and streamers ore their head,
Now bragging Spaniards, take heed of your tayle.
Dub a dub, &c.                                                15
Unto Cales cunninglye, came we most speedilye,
Where the kinges navy securelye did ryde;
Being upon their backs, piercing their butts of sacks,
Ere any Spaniards our coming descryde.                          20
Dub a dub, &c.
Which at that season was made in that place;
The beacons were fyred, as need then required;
To hyde their great treasure they had little space.
Dub a dub, &c.                                                26
There you might see their ships, how they were fyred fast,
And how their men drowned themselves in the sea;
There might you hear them cry, wayle and weep piteously,
When they saw no shift to scape thence away.                    30
Dub a dub, &c.
The great St. Phillip, the pryde of the Spaniards,
Was burnt to the bottom, and sunk in the sea;
But the St. Andrew, and eke the St. Matthew,
Dub a dub, &c.
The Earl of Essex most valiant and hardye,
The Spanyards, which saw them, were greatly alarmed,
Did fly for their savegard, and durst not come down.
Dub a dub, &c.                                                41
Now, quoth the noble Earl, courage my soldiers all,
Fight and be valiant, the spoil you shall have;
Dub a dub, &c.                                                46
Wee marched in presentlye, decking the walls on hye,
Dub a dub, &c.
Entering the houses then, of the most richest men,
For gold and treasure we searched eche day;
Dub a dub, &c.
Damasks and sattens and velvets full fayre:
Dub a dub, &c.
Thus Cales was taken, and our brave general
March'd to the market-place, where he did stand:
Dub a dub, &c.
And would not ransome their towne as they said,
With their fair wanscots, their presses and bedsteds,
And when the town burned all in a flame,
This beautiful old ballad most probably took its rise from one of these
descents made on the Spanish coasts in the time of queen Elizabeth; and
in all likelihood from that which is celebrated in the foregoing ballad.
It was a tradition in the West of England, that the person admired
ballad, was not many years ago preserved at Littlecot, near Hungerford,
Wilts, the seat of that respectable family.
Another tradition hath pointed out Sir Richard Levison, of Trentham,
in Staffordshire, as the subject of this ballad; who married Margaret
daughter of Charles Earl of Nottingham; and was eminently distinguished
as a naval officer and commander in all the expeditions against the
Spaniards in the latter end of Q. Elizabeth's reign, particularly in
that to Cadiz in 1596, when he was aged 27. He died in 1605, and has a
monument, with his effigy in brass, in Wolverhampton church.
It is printed from an ancient black-letter copy, corrected in part by
the Editor's folio MS.
candidates for the honour of being associated with the Spanish
Lady, for strong claims have also been brought forward in favour
of Sir Urias Legh of Adlington, Cheshire, and of Sir John Bolle of
Thorpe Hall, Lincolnshire. A descendant of the latter worthy wrote
a letter in his favour, which appeared in the _Times_ of May 1,
Illingworth's _Topographical Account of Scampton, with Anecdotes_
_of the family of Bolles_, it is stated, 'the portrait of Sir
John, drawn in 1596, at the age of thirty-six years, having on
him the gold chain given him by the Spanish Lady, &c., is still
in the possession of Captain Birch.' That portrait is now in the
possession of Captain Birch's successor, Thomas Bosvile, Esq.,
of Ravensfield Park, Yorkshire." The writer of the letter signs
himself Charles Lee, and dates from Coldrey, Hants. He adds another
extract from Illingworth's _Scampton_, which is as follows: "On
Sir John Bolle's departure from Cadiz, the Spanish Lady sent as
presents to his wife, a profusion of jewels, and other valuables,
amongst which was her portrait, drawn in green, plate, money, and
other treasure. Some articles are still in the possession of the
family, though her picture was unfortunately and by accident,
disposed of about half a century since. This portrait being drawn
in green, gave occasion to her being called in the neighbourhood
of Thorpe Hall, the Green Lady, where to this day there is a
traditionary superstition among the vulgar that Thorpe Hall was
haunted by the Green Lady, who used nightly to take her seat in a
particular tree near the mansion."
Mr. Chappell points out that this ballad is quoted in _Cupid's_
_Whirligig_, 1616, and parodied in Rowley's _A Match at Midnight_,
_the banished Cavaliers_, and in Richard Brome's _Northern Lasse_.
Shenstone was not satisfied with the beautiful simplicity of this
charming ballad, and attempted in his _Moral Tale of Love and_
_Honour_ to place it before his readers "in less grovelling accents
than the simple guise of ancient record." The mode he adopted was
to spin it out by the frequent introduction of _Ah me_ and _'tis
true_, and addresses to the "generous maid," Elvira, Iberia, &c.
Wordsworth acted far differently, when he founded his exquisite
_Armenian Lady's Love_ upon this ballad:
"You have heard of a Spanish Lady,
How she wooed an English man;
Hear now of a fair Armenian,
Daughter of the proud Soldan."
The copy in the folio MS. (ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. iii. p.
Will you hear a Spanish lady,
How she wooed an English man?
Garments gay as rich as may be
Decked with jewels she had on.
Of a comely countenance and grace was she,                         5
And by birth and parentage of high degree.
As his prisoner there he kept her,
In his hands her life did lye;
Cupid's bands did tye them faster
By the liking of an eye.                                        10
In his courteous company was all her joy,
To favour him in any thing she was not coy.
But at last there came commandment
For to set the ladies free,
With their jewels still adorned,                                  15
None to do them injury.
Then said this lady mild, Full woe is me;
O let me still sustain this kind captivity!
Gallant captain, shew some pity
To a ladye in distresse;                                        20
Leave me not within this city,
For to dye in heavinesse:
Thou hast set this present day my body free,
But my heart in prison still remains with thee.
"How should'st thou, fair lady, love me,                          25
Whom thou knowst thy country's foe?
Thy fair wordes make me suspect thee:
Serpents lie where flowers grow."
All the harm I wishe to thee, most courteous knight,
God grant the same upon my head may fully light.                  30
Blessed be the time and season,
That you came on Spanish ground;
If our foes you may be termed,
Gentle foes we have you found:
With our city, you have won our hearts eche one,                  35
Then to your country bear away, that is your owne.
"Rest you still, most gallant lady;
Rest you still, and weep no more;
Of fair lovers there is plenty,
Spain doth yield a wonderous store."                            40
Spaniards fraught with jealousy we often find,
But Englishmen through all the world are counted kind.
Leave me not unto a Spaniard,
You alone enjoy my heart;
I am lovely, young, and tender,                                   45
Love is likewise my desert:
Still to serve thee day and night my mind is prest;
The wife of every Englishman is counted blest.
"It wold be a shame, fair lady,
For to bear a woman hence;                                      50
English soldiers never carry
Any such without offence."
I'll quickly change myself, if it be so,
"I have neither gold nor silver                                   55
To maintain thee in this case,
And to travel is great charges,
As you know in every place."
My chains and jewels every one shal be thy own,
"On the seas are many dangers,
Many storms do there arise,
Which wil be to ladies dreadful,
And force tears from watery eyes."
"Courteous ladye, leave this fancy,
I in England have already
A sweet woman to my wife:                                       70
I will not falsify my vow for gold nor gain,
Nor yet for all the fairest dames that live in Spain."
O how happy is that woman
That enjoys so true a friend!
Commend me to thy lovely lady,
And these bracelets for a token;
Grieving that I was so bold:
I will spend my days in prayer,                                   85
In a nunnery will I shroud mee
But ere my prayers have an end, be sure of this,
To pray for thee and for thy love I will not miss.                90
Thus farewell, most gallant captain!
Count not Spanish ladies wanton,
Though to thee my love was bent:
"The like fall ever to thy share, most fair ladie."
Is extracted from an ancient historical poem in XIII. Books, intitled,
_Albion's England_, by _William Warner_: "An author (says a former
editor,) only unhappy in the choice of his subject, and measure of
his verse. His poem is an epitome of the British history, and written
with great learning, sense, and spirit. In some places fine to an
extraordinary degree, as I think will eminently appear in the ensuing
episode (of Argentile and Curan). A tale full of beautiful incidents in
the romantic taste, extremely affecting, rich in ornament, wonderfully
various in style; and in short, one of the most beautiful pastorals
I ever met with." (_Muses Library_, 1738, 8vo.) To his merit nothing
can be objected unless perhaps an affected quaintness in some of his
expressions, and an indelicacy in some of his pastoral images.
and to have been educated in Oxford, at Magdalene-hall: as also in the
latter part of his life to have been retained in the service of Henry
Cary Lord Hunsdon, to whom he dedicates his poem. However that may have
been, new light is thrown upon his history, and the time and manner
of his death are now ascertained, by the following extract from the
parish register book of Amwell, in Hertfordshire; which was obligingly
communicated to the Editor by Mr. _Hoole_, the very ingenious
translator of Tasso, &c.
(1608--1609.) "Master William Warner, a man of good yeares and of
honest reputation; by his profession an Atturnye of the Common Pleas;
author of _Albions England_, diynge suddenly in the night in his bedde,
without any former complaynt or sicknesse, on thursday night beeinge
the 9th daye of March; was buried the satturday following, and lyeth
in the church at the corner under the stone of Walter Ffader." Signed
_Tho. Hassall Vicarius_.
Though now Warner is so seldom mentioned, his contemporaries ranked him
on a level with Spenser, and called them the Homer and Virgil of their
seems to have taken for his model, having deduced a perpetual poem from
the deluge down to the aera of Elizabeth, full of lively digressions
and entertaining episodes. And though he is sometimes harsh, affected,
and obscure, he often displays a most charming and pathetic simplicity:
as where he describes Eleanor's harsh treatment of Rosamond:
"With that she dasht her on the lippes
So dyed double red:
Hard was the heart that gave the blow,
Soft were those lippes that bled."
The edition of _Albion's England_ here followed was printed in 4to.
by William Warner, and now revised and newly enlarged by the same
author." The story of _Argentile and Curan_ is I believe the poet's own
invention; it is not mentioned in any of our chronicles. It was however
so much admired, that not many years after he published it, came out
a larger poem on the same subject in stanzas of six lines, intitled,
_The most pleasant and delightful historie of Curan a prince of
Danske, and the fayre princesse Argentile, daughter and heyre to
Adelbright, sometime king of Northumberland, &c. by_ William Webster,
_London_, 1617, in 8 sheets 4to. An indifferent paraphrase of the
following poem.--This episode of Warner's has also been altered into
the common ballad, _of the two young Princes on Salisbury Plain_,
which is chiefly composed of Warner's lines, with a few contractions
and interpolations, but all greatly for the worse. See the collection
of _Hist. Ballads_, 1727, 3 vols. 12mo.
The Bruton's 'being' departed hence seaven kingdoms here begonne,
Where diversly in divers broyles the Saxons lost and wonne.
King Edel and king Adelbright in Diria jointly raigne;
In loyal concorde during life these kingly friends remaine.
When Adelbright should leave his life, to Edel thus he sayes;      5
By those same bondes of happie love, that held us friends alwaies;
By our by-parted crowne, of which the moyetie is mine;
By God, to whom my soule must passe, and so in time may thine;
I pray thee, nay I conjure thee, to nourish, as thine owne,
Thy niece, my daughter Argentile, till she to age be growne;      10
And then, as thou receivest it, resigne to her my throne.
A promise had for his bequest, the testator he dies;
But all that Edel undertooke, he afterwards denies.
Yet well he 'fosters for' a time the damsell that was growne
The fairest lady under heaven; whose beautie being knowne,        15
A many princes seeke her love; but none might her obtaine;
And for that cause from sight of such he did his ward restraine.
The maid, with whom he fell in love, as much as man might bee.    20
Nor he, nor any noble-man admitted to her vewe.
One while in melancholy fits he pines himselfe awaye;
Anon he thought by force of arms to win her if he maye:
And still against the kings restraint did secretly invay.         25
At length the high controller Love, whom none may disobay,
Imbased him from lordlines into a kitchen drudge,
That so at least of life or death she might become his judge.
Accesse so had to see and speake, he did his love bewray,
And tells his birth: her answer was, she husbandles would stay.   30
Meane while the king did beate his braines, his booty to atchieve,
Nor caring what became of her, so he by her might thrive;
At last his resolution was some pessant should her wive.
And (which was working to his wish) he did observe with joye
How Curan, whom he thought a drudge, scapt many an amorous
The king, perceiving such his veine, promotes his vassal still,
Assured therefore of his love, but not suspecting who
The lover was, the king himselfe in his behalf did woe.
The lady resolute from love, unkindly takes that he               40
Should barre the noble, and unto so base a match agree:
And therefore shifting out of doores, departed thence by stealth;
Preferring povertie before a dangerous life in wealth.
When Curan heard of her escape, the anguish in his hart
Was more than much, and after her from court he did depart;       45
Forgetfull of himselfe, his birth, his country, friends, and all,
And only minding (whom he mist) the foundresse of his thrall.
Nor meanes he after to frequent or court, or stately townes,
A brace of years he lived thus, well pleased so to live,          50
And shepherd-like to feed a flocke himselfe did wholly give.
So wasting, love, by worke, and want, grew almost to the waine:
But then began a second love, the worser of the twaine.
A country wench, a neatherds maid, where Curan kept his sheepe,
Did feed her drove: and now on her was all the shepherds keepe.   55
might holde.
snow,                                                         60
And whilst his py-bald curre did sleepe, and sheep-hooke lay him by,
On hollow quilles of oten straw he piped melody
But when he spyed her his saint, he wip'd his greasie shooes,
And clear'd the drivell from his beard, and thus the shepheard
wooes.                                                        65
"I have, sweet wench, a peece of cheese, as good as tooth may chawe,
with thee.
Thou art too elvish, faith thou art, too elvish and too coy:      70
Am I, I pray thee, beggarly, that such a flock enjoye?
I wis I am not: yet that thou doest hold me in disdaine
quaint) that crave
The match, that thou, I wot not why, maist, but mislik'st to
have.                                                         75
How wouldst thou match? (for well I wot, thou art a female) I,
The plowmans labour hath no end, and he a churle will prove:
The craftsman hath more worke in hand then fitteth unto love:
The merchant, traffiquing abroad, suspects his wife at home:      80
Then chuse a shepheard: with the sun he doth his flocke unfold,
And all the day on hill or plaine he merrie chat can hold;
And with the sun doth folde againe; then jogging home betime,
He turnes a crab, or turnes a round, or sings some merry
Nor lacks he gleeful tales, whilst round the nut-brown bowl doth
And sitteth singing care away, till he to bed be got:
Theare sleepes he soundly all the night, forgetting morrow-cares:
Nor feares he blasting of his corne, nor uttering of his wares;
Or storms by seas, or stirres on land, or cracke of credit lost;  90
Not spending franklier than his flocke, shall still defray the cost.
Well wot I, sooth they say, that say more quiet nights and daies
The shepheard sleeps and wakes, than he whose cattel he doth graize.
Beleeve me, lasse, a king is but a man, and so am I:
Content is worth a monarchie, and mischiefs hit the hie;          95
As late it did a king and his not dwelling far from hence,
Who left a daughter, save thyselfe, for fair a matchless wench."--
Here did he pause, as if his tongue had done his heart offence.
How faire she was, and who she was. "She bore, quoth he, the
bell                                                         100
For beautie: though I clownish am, I know what beautie is;
Or did I not, at seeing thee, I senceles were to mis.
Her stature comely, tall; her gate well graced; and her wit
To marvell at, not meddle with, as matchless I omit.
A globe-like head, a gold-like haire, a forehead smooth, and
hie,                                                         105
An even nose; on either side did shine a grayish eie:
Two rosie cheeks, round ruddy lips, white just-set teeth within;
Her snowie necke, with blewish veines, stood bolt upright upon
Her portly shoulders; beating balles her veined breasts, anon    110
Adde more to beautie. Wand-like was her middle falling still,
And more, her long, and limber armes had white and azure wrists;
And slender fingers aunswere to her smooth and lillie fists.
A legge in print, a pretie foot; conjecture of the rest:
For amorous eies, observing forme, think parts obscured best.    116
With these, O raretie! with these her tong of speech was spare;
But speaking, Venus seem'd to speake, the balle from Ide to bear.
Wheare equall mixture did not want of milde and stately grace.   120
Her smiles were sober, and her lookes were chearefull unto all:
A quiet minde, a patient moode, and not disdaining any;
Not gybing, gadding, gawdy: and sweete faculties had many.
A nimph, no tong, no heart, no eie, might praise, might wish,
might see;                                                   125
For life, for love, for forme; more good, more worth, more faire
than shee.
Yea such an one, as such was none, save only she was such:
Of Argentile to say the most, were to be silent much."
I knew the lady very well, but worthles of such praise,
The neatresse said: and muse I do, a shepheard thus should
blaze                                                        130
Thy clownish shape a coined shew. But wherefore dost thou weepe?
The shepheard wept, and she was woe, and both doe silence keepe.
"In troth, quoth he, I am not such, as seeming I professe:
But then for her, and now for thee, I from myselfe digresse.     135
Her loved I (wretch that I am a recreant to be)
I loved her, that hated love, but now I die for thee.
At Kirkland is my fathers court, and Curan is my name,
In Edels court sometimes in pompe, till love countrould the same:
But now--what now?--deare heart, how now? what ailest thou to
weepe?"                                                      140
The damsell wept, and he was woe, and both did silence keepe.
I graunt, quoth she, it was too much that you did love so much:
But whom your former could not move, your second love doth touch.
Thy twice-beloved argentile submitteth her to thee,
And for thy double love presents herself a single fee,
In passion not in person chang'd, and I, my lord, am she.        146
They sweetly surfeiting in joy, and silent for a space,
When as the extasie had end, did tenderly imbrace;
And for their wedding, and their wish got fitting time and place.
Not England (for of Hengist then was named so this land)         150
Then Curan had an hardier knight; his force could none withstand:
Whose sheep-hooke laid apart, he then had higher things in hand.
First, making knowne his lawfull claime in Argentile her right,
And so from trecherous Edel tooke at once his life and crowne,   155
love, 'scaped Curan;" _i.e._ escaped from him, being off his guard.
(consisting of 6 northern counties, besides part of Scotland) was
for a long time divided into two lesser sovereignties, viz. Deira
(called here Diria) which contained the southern parts, and Bernicia,
comprehending those which lay north.
Only the three first stanzas of this song are ancient; these are
extracted from a small quarto MS. in the Editor's possession, written
in the time of Q. Elizabeth. As they seemed to want application, this
has been attempted by a modern hand.
Corin, most unhappie swaine,
Whither wilt thou drive thy flocke?
Little foode is on the plaine;
Full of danger is the rocke:
Wolfes and beares doe kepe the woodes;                             5
Forests tangled are with brakes:
Meadowes subject are to floodes;
Moores are full of miry lakes.
Yet to shun all plaine, and hill,
Forest, moore, and meadow-ground,                               10
Hunger will as surely kill:
How may then reliefe be found?
Since my waywarde love begunne,
Equall doubts begett debate                                       15
What to seeke, and what to shunne.
Spare to speke, and spare to speed;
Yet to speke will move disdaine:
If I see her not I bleed,
Yet her sight augments my paine.                                20
What may then poor Corin doe?
Tell me, shepherdes, quicklye tell;
For to linger thus in woe
Though so many vulgar errors have prevailed concerning this celebrated
courtezan, no character in history has been more perfectly handed down
to us. We have her portrait drawn by two masterly pens; the one has
delineated the features of her person, the other those of her character
and story. Sir Thomas More drew from the life, and Drayton has copied
an original picture of her. The reader will pardon the length of the
quotations, as they serve to correct many popular mistakes relating
to her catastrophe. The first is from Sir Thomas More's _History of
Richard III._ written in 1513, about thirty years after the death of
Edw. IV.
"Now then by and by, as it wer for anger, not for covetise, the
protector sent into the house of Shores wife (for her husband dwelled
not with her) and spoiled her of al that ever she had, (above the value
of 2 or 3 thousand marks) and sent her body to prison. And when he had
a while laide unto her, for the maner sake, that she went about to
bewitch him, and that she was of counsel with the lord chamberlein to
destroy him: in conclusion when that no colour could fasten upon these
matters, then he layd heinously to her charge the thing that herselfe
could not deny, that al the world wist was true, and that natheles
every man laughed at to here it then so sodainly so highly taken,--that
she was naught of her body. And for thys cause (as a goodly continent
prince, clene and fautless of himself, sent oute of heaven into this
vicious world for the amendment of mens maners) he caused the bishop
of London to put her to open pennance, going before the crosse in
procession upon a sonday with a taper in her hand. In which she went in
countenance and pace demure so womanly; and albeit she was out of al
array save her kyrtle only, yet went she so fair and lovely, namelye,
while the wondering of the people caste a comly rud in her chekes (of
which she before had most misse) that her great shame wan her much
praise among those that were more amorous of her body, then curious
of her soule. And many good folke also, that hated her living, and
glad wer to se sin corrected, yet pittied thei more her penance then
rejoiced therin, when thei considred that the protector procured it
more of a corrupt intent, then any virtuous affeccion.
"This woman was born in London, worshipfully frended, honestly brought
up, and very wel maryed, saving somewhat too soone; her husbande
an honest citizen, yonge, and goodly, and of good substance. But
forasmuche as they were coupled ere she wer wel ripe, she not very
fervently loved, for whom she never longed. Which was happely the
thinge, that the more easily made her encline unto the king's appetite,
when he required her. Howbeit the respect of his royaltie, the hope
of gay apparel, ease, plesure, and other wanton welth, was able soone
to perse a soft tender hearte. But when the king had abused her, anon
her husband (as he was an honest man, and one that could his good, not
presuming to touch a kinges concubine) left her up to him al together.
which in the kinges daies, albeit he was sore enamoured upon her,
yet he forbare her, either for reverence, or for a certain friendly
faithfulness.
"Proper she was, and faire: nothing in her body that you wold have
changed, but if you would have wished her somewhat higher. Thus say
thei that knew her in her youthe. Albeit some that _now see her_
(_for yet she liveth_) deme her never to have bene wel visaged. Whose
jugement seemeth me somewhat like, as though men should gesse the
bewty of one longe before departed, by her scalpe taken out of the
charnel-house; for now is she old, lene, withered, and dried up,
nothing left but ryvilde skin, and hard bone. And yet being even such,
whoso wel advise her visage, might gesse and devise which partes how
filled, wold make it a fair face.
"Yet delited not men so much in her bewty, as in her pleasant
behaviour. For a proper wit had she, and could both rede wel and
write; mery in company, redy and quick of aunswer, neither mute nor
ful of bable; sometime taunting without displeasure, and not without
disport. The king would say, That he had three concubines, which in
three divers properties diversly excelled. One the meriest, another
the wiliest, the thirde the holiest harlot in his realme, as one whom
no man could get out of the church lightly to any place, but it were
to his bed. The other two wer somwhat greater personages, and natheles
of their humilite content to be nameles, and to forbere the praise of
those properties; but the meriest was the Shoris wife, in whom the
king therfore toke special pleasure. For many he had, but her he
loved, whose favour, to sai the trouth (for sinne it wer to belie the
devil) she never abused to any mans hurt, but to many a mans comfort
and relief. Where the king toke displeasure, she would mitigate and
appease his mind: where men were out of favour, she wold bring them in
his grace: for many, that had highly offended, shee obtained pardon: of
great forfeitures she gate men remission: and finally in many weighty
sutes she stode many men in gret stede, either for none or very smal
rewardes, and those rather gay than rich: either for that she was
content with the dede selfe well done, or for that she delited to be
sued unto, and to show what she was able to do wyth the king, or for
that wanton women and welthy be not alway covetous.
"I doubt not some shal think this woman too sleight a thing to be
written of, and set amonge the remembraunces of great matters: which
thei shal specially think, that happely shal esteme her only by
that thei _now see her_. But me semeth the chaunce so much the more
worthy to be remembred, in how much she is _now_ in the more beggerly
condicion, unfrended and worne out of acquaintance, after good
substance, after as grete favour with the prince, after as grete sute
and seeking to with al those, that in those days had busynes to spede,
as many other men were in their times, which be now famouse only by the
infamy of their il dedes. Her doinges were not much lesse, albeit thei
be muche lesse remembred because thei were not so evil. For men use,
if they have an evil turne, to write it in marble; and whoso doth us a
her; for _at this daye_ shee beggeth of many at this daye living, that
at this day had begged, if shee had not bene." See More's _workes_,
folio, bl. let. 1557, pp. 56, 57.
_Drayton_ has written a poetical epistle from this lady to her royal
lover, and in his notes thereto he thus draws her portrait: "Her
stature was meane, her haire of a dark yellow, her face round and full,
her eye gray, delicate harmony being betwixt each part's proportion,
and each proportion's colour, her body fat, white and smooth, her
countenance cheerfull and like to her condition. The picture which I
have seen of hers was such as she rose out of her bed in the morning,
having nothing on but a rich mantle cast under one arme over her
shoulder, and sitting on a chaire, on which her naked arm did lie.
What her father's name was, or where she was borne, is not certainly
knowne: but Shore, a young man of right goodly person, wealth and
behaviour, abandoned her bed after the king had made her his concubine.
Richard III. causing her to do open penance in Paul's church-yard,
_commanded that no man should relieve her_, which the tyrant did, not
so much for his hatred to sinne, but that by making his brother's life
odious, he might cover his horrible treasons the more cunningly." See
_England's Heroical Epistles_, by Mich. Drayton, Esq; Lond. 1637,
An original picture of _Jane Shore_ almost naked is preserved in the
Provost's Lodgings at Eton; and another picture of her is in the
Provost's Lodge at King's College, Cambridge: to both which foundations
she is supposed to have done friendly offices with _Edward IV._ A small
quarto Mezzotinto print was taken from the former of these by _J.
Faber_.
The history of _Jane Shore_ receives new illustration from the
following letter of _K. Richard III._ which is preserved in the _Harl.
MSS._ Num. 433, Art. 2378, but of which the copy transmitted to the
Editor has been reduced to modern orthography, &c. It is said to have
been addressed to _Russel_ bp. of Lincoln, lord chancellor, Anno 1484.
By the _King_.
"Right Reverend Father in God, &c. signifying unto you, that it
is shewed unto us, that our Servant and Solicitor Thomas Lynom,
marvellously blinded and abused with the late Wife of William Shore,
now living in Ludgate by our commandment, hath made Contract of
Matrimony with her, as it is said, and intendeth, to our full great
marvel, to effect the same. WE, for many causes, would be sorry that he
should be so disposed; pray you therefore to send for him, and in that
ye goodly may, exhort, and stir him to the contrary: And if ye find him
utterly set for to marry her, and none otherwise would be advertized,
then, if it may stand with the laws of the church, we be content the
time of marriage be deferred to our coming next to London; that upon
sufficient Surety found of her good abearing, ye do so send for her
Keeper, and discharge him of our said commandment, by Warrant of these,
committing her to the rule, and guiding of her Father, or any other, by
your direction, in the mean season. Given, &c.
"_RIC._ Rex."
It appears from two articles in the same MS. that K. Richard had
granted to the said _Thomas Linom_ the office of King's Solicitor (Art.
Heirs Male (Art. 596.)
The following ballad is printed (with some corrections) from an old
black-letter copy in the Pepys collection. Its full title is, _The
woefull lamentation of Jane Shore, a goldsmith's wife in London,
sometime king Edward IV. his concubine_. To the tune of _Live with
me, &c._ (See the first volume.) To every stanza is annexed the
following burthen:
"Then maids and wives in time amend,
For love and beauty will have end."
The first known ballad upon her story was written by Thomas
Churchyard (who died in 1604) and is included in the _Mirror for_
_Magistrates_. The ballad here printed is attributed to Thomas
Deloney, and was entered on the books of the Stationers' Company
to William White, printer, on the 11th of June, 1603, but no copy
of this edition is known to exist. Mr. Chappell remarks that no
copy in any of the collections can be dated "earlier than Charles
the Second's time, or at most than the Protectorate" (_Roxburghe
Ballads_, vol. i. p. 479). It is printed in the _Collection of
Old Ballads_, 1723 (vol. i. p. 145), and in the same collection
is a burlesque song called _King Edward and Jane Shore_ (vol. i.
p. 153). The Roxburghe copy has a second part which Mr. Chappell
says is "probably by another hand and of later date." Deloney has
paid very little attention to facts, and many of his statements are
groundless, for instance no one was hanged for succouring Jane (vv.
she survived her penance nearly fifty years. (She died in the
Shore in verse 13, but we have the best authority for affirming
that his true name was William. Richard III. followed Jane Shore
with unrelenting hate, and not content with making her do penance,
clapping her in prison and depriving her of all her property, which
amounted to the value of 3000 marks, equal to about _L_20,000 of
our present money, he prevented her from marrying a respectable man.
There is no date to the paper printed above, but as John Russell,
D.D., Bishop of Lincoln, was Richard's Chancellor only from Nov.
According to Mr. Nugent Bell, in his _Huntingdon Peerage_, the name
of the father of Jane Shore was Thomas Wainstead. Granger says
that the Duchess of Montagu had a lock of her hair which looked as
if it had been powdered with gold dust. For further information,
see _Some Particulars of the Life of Jane Shore_, by the Rev. Mark
Of Rosamonde that was so faire,
Had cause her sorrowes to declare,
Then let Jane Shore with sorrowe sing,
That was beloved of a king.
In maiden yeares my beautye bright                                 5
Was loved dear of lord and knight;
But yet the love that they requir'd,
It was not as my friends desir'd.
My parents they, for thirst of gaine,
A husband for me did obtaine;                                     10
And I, their pleasure to fulfille,
Was forc'd to wedd against my wille.
To Matthew Shore I was a wife,
Till lust brought ruine to my life;
And then my life I lewdlye spent,                                 15
Which makes my soul for to lament.
In Lombard-street I once did dwelle,
As London yet can witness welle;
Where many gallants did beholde
My beautye in a shop of golde.                                    20
I spred my plumes, as wantons doe,
Some sweet and secret friende to wooe,
Because chast love I did not finde
Agreeing to my wanton minde.
At last my name in court did ring                                 25
Into the eares of Englandes king,
Who came and lik'd, and love requir'd,
But I made coye what he desir'd;
Yet Mistress Blague, a neighbour neare,
Whose friendship I esteemed deare,                                30
Did saye, It was a gallant thing
To be beloved of a king.
By her persuasions I was led,
For to defile my marriage-bed,
And wronge my wedded husband Shore,                               35
Whom I had married yeares before.
In heart and mind I did rejoyce,
That I had made so sweet a choice;
And therefore did my state resigne,
To be king Edward's concubine.                                    40
From city then to court I went,
To reape the pleasures of content;
There had the joyes that love could bring,
And knew the secrets of a king.
When I was thus advanc'd on highe                                 45
Commanding Edward with mine eye,
For Mrs. Blague I in short space
Obtainde a livinge from his grace.
No friende I had but in short time
I made unto a promotion climbe;                                   50
But yet for all this costlye pride,
My husbande could not mee abide.
His bed, though wronged by a king,
His heart with deadlye griefe did sting;
From England then he goes away                                    55
To end his life beyond the sea.
He could not live to see his name
Impaired by my wanton shame;
Although a prince of peerlesse might
Did reape the pleasure of his right.                              60
Long time I lived in the courte,
With lords and ladies of great sorte;
And when I smil'd all men were glad,
But when I frown'd my prince grewe sad.
But yet a gentle minde I bore                                     65
To helplesse people, that were poore;
I still redrest the orphans crye,
And sav'd their lives condemnd to dye.
I still had ruth on widowes tears,
I succour'd babes of tender yeares;                               70
And never look'd for other gaine
But love and thankes for all my paine.
At last my royall king did dye,
And then my dayes of woe grew nighe;
When crook-back Richard got the crowne,                           75
King Edwards friends were soon put downe.
I then was punisht for my sin,
That I so long had lived in;
Yea, every one that was his friend,
This tyrant brought to shamefull end.                             80
Then for my lewd and wanton life,
That made a strumpet of a wife,
I penance did in Lombard-street,
In shamefull manner in a sheet.
Where many thousands did me viewe,                                85
Who late in court my credit knewe;
Which made the teares run down my face,
To thinke upon my foul disgrace.
Not thus content, they took from mee
My goodes, my livings, and my fee,                                90
And charg'd that none should me relieve,
Nor any succour to me give.
Then unto Mrs. Blague I went,
To whom my jewels I had sent,
In hope therebye to ease my want,                                 95
When riches fail'd, and love grew scant:
But she denyed to me the same
When in my need for them I came:
To recompence my former love,
Out of her doores shee did me shove.                             100
So love did vanish with my state,
Which now my soul repents too late;
Therefore example take by mee,
For friendship parts in povertie.
But yet one friend among the rest,                               105
Whom I before had seen distrest,
And sav'd his life, condemn'd to die,
Did give me food to succour me:
For which, by lawe, it was decreed
That he was hanged for that deed;                                110
His death did grieve me so much more,
Than had I dyed myself therefore.
Then those to whom I had done good,
Durst not afford me any food;
Whereby I begged all the day,                                    115
And still in streets by night I lay.
My gowns beset with pearl and gold,
Were turn'd to simple garments old;
My chains and gems and golden rings,
To filthy rags and loathsome things.                             120
Thus was I scorn'd of maid and wife,
For leading such a wicked life;
Both sucking babes and children small,
Did make their pastime at my fall.
I could not get one bit of bread,                                125
Whereby my hunger might be fed:
Nor drink, but such as channels yield,
Or stinking ditches in the field.
Thus, weary of my life, at lengthe
I yielded up my vital strength                                   130
Within a ditch of loathsome scent,
Where carrion dogs did much frequent:
The which now since my dying daye,
Which is a witness of my sinne,                                  135
For being concubine to a king.
You wanton wives, that fall to lust,
Be you assur'd that God is just;
Whoredome shall not escape his hand,
Nor pride unpunish'd in this land.                               140
If God to me such shame did bring,
That yielded only to a king,
How shall they scape that daily run
To practise sin with every one?
You husbands, match not but for love,                            145
Lest some disliking after prove;
Women, be warn'd when you are wives,
What plagues are due to sinful lives:
Then, maids and wives, in time amend,
For love and beauty will have end.                             150
proclamation of Richard's, dated at Leicester, Oct. 23, 1483, wherein
a reward of 1000 marks in money, or 100 a year in land is offered for
taking "Thomas late marquis of Dorset," who, "not having the fear of
God, nor the salvation of his own soul, before his eyes, has damnably
debauched and defiled many maids, widows, and wives, and _lived in
actual adultery with the wife of Shore_." Buckingham was at that
time in rebellion, but as Dorset was not with him, Richard could not
accuse him of treason, and therefore made a handle of these pretended
Richard of Dorset's living in adultery with Jane Shore.--"It could
not be before she was taken by Edward; it could not be during that
king's life; it could not be afterwards, by Richard's own account,
for by his proclamation she then was the mistress of Hastings to
the night preceding his being put to death. It could not be after
that catastrophe, for ever after then Richard kept her either in
the Tower or in Ludgate a close prisoner."--_Brayley's Graphic
that proverbial reflection in _Hen. VIII._ act iv. sc. 2.
"Men's evill manners live in brass: their virtues
We write in water."
Shakesp. in his play of _Rich. III._ follows More's _Hist._ of that
reign, and therefore could not but see this passage.
a common Sewer (vulgarly Shore) or drain. See Stow.
de Sordig was Ambassador from Edward III. to the Pope, to remonstrate
with his Holiness on his claim to present foreigners to English
This little simple elegy is given, with some corrections, from two
copies, one of which is in _The golden garland of princely delights_.
The burthen of the song, _Ding Dong_, &c. is at present appropriated
to burlesque subjects, and therefore may excite only ludicrous ideas
in a modern reader; but in the time of our poet it usually accompanied
the most solemn and mournful strains. Of this kind is that fine aerial
Dirge in Shakespear's _Tempest_:
"Full fadom five thy father lies,
Of his bones are corrall made;
Those are pearles that were his eyes;
Nothing of him, that doth fade,
But doth suffer a sea-change
Into something rich and strange:
Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell,
Harke now I heare them, Ding dong bell."
"Burthen, Ding Dong."
I make no doubt but the poet intended to conclude the above air in a
manner the most solemn and expressive of melancholy.
My Phillida, adieu love!
For evermore farewel!
Ay me! I've lost my true love,
And thus I ring her knell,
Ding dong, ding dong, ding dong,                                 5
My Phillida is dead!
I'll stick a branch of willow
At my fair Phillis' head.
For my fair Phillida
Our bridal bed was made:                                        10
But 'stead of silkes so gay,
She in her shroud is laid.
Ding, &c.
Her corpse shall be attended
By maides in fair array,
Till the obsequies are ended,                                     15
And she is wrapt in clay.
Ding, &c.
Her herse it shall be carried
By youths, that do excell;
And when that she is buried,
I thus will ring her knell,                                     20
Ding, &c.
A garland shall be framed
By art and natures skill,
Of sundry-colour'd flowers,
Ding, &c.
And sundry-colour'd ribbands                                      25
On it I will bestow;
With her to grave shall go.
Ding, &c.
I'll decke her tomb with flowers,
The rarest ever seen,                                           30
And with my tears, as showers,
I'll keepe them fresh and green.
Ding, &c.
Instead of fairest colours,
Ding, &c.
Her image shall be painted                                        35
On my distressed heart.
And thereon shall be graven
Her epitaph so faire,
"Here lies the loveliest maiden,
That e'er gave shepheard care."                                 40
Ding, &c.
In sable will I mourne;
Blacke shall be all my weede;
Ay me! I am forlorne,
Now Phillida is dead!
Ding dong, ding dong, ding dong,
My Phillida is dead!                                      46
I'll stick a branch of willow
At my fair Phillis' head
note on this custom, see _The Bride's Burial_, vol iii. Book II. No.
erected upon tombs and monuments.
I shall begin this third book with an old allegoric Satire; a manner
of moralizing, which, if it was not first introduced by the author of
repute by that ancient Satirist. It is not so generally known that the
kind of verse used in this ballad hath any affinity with the peculiar
metre of that writer, for which reason I shall throw together some
cursory remarks on that very singular species of versification, the
The following Song, intitled, _The Complaint of Conscience_, is
printed from the Editor's folio Manuscript: Some corruptions in the
old copy are here corrected; but with notice to the Reader, wherever
it was judged necessary, by inclosing the corrections between inverted
'commas.'
Furnivall's edition of the Percy folio MS. (vol. ii. p. 174), with
a long preface by Mr. Furnivall, on the earnest side of Early
English literature.
It will be seen from the foot-notes that Percy left many of his
To God for to meditate was my entent;
A silly poore creature ragged and rent,
This made me muse, and much 'to' desire
To know what kind of man hee shold bee;
I stept to him straight, and did him require                      10
His name and his secretts to shew unto mee.
His head he cast up, and wooful was hee,
My name, quoth he, is the cause of my care,
And makes me scorned, and left here so bare.
And I will, saithe he, declare my whole greefe;
My name is called CONSCIENCE:--wheratt he did frowne,
He pined to repeate it, and grinded his teethe,
I was entertained with kinges, and with peeres.
Dukes, earles, and barrons esteem'd of my name;
And how that I liv'd there needs no repetition:                   25
I was ever holden in honest condition,
For howsoever the lawes went in Westminster-hall,
When sentence was given, for me they wold call.
No incomes at all the landlords wold take,
But one pore peny, that was their fine;                           30
And that they acknowledged to be for my sake.
The poore wold doe nothing without councell mine:
I ruled the world with the right line:
But I was called a wittenesse therto:
No use for noe money, nor forfett wold take,
But I wold controule them, if that they did soe:
'And' that makes me live now in great woe,                        40
For then came in Pride, Sathan's disciple,
That is Covetousnes, Lecherye, Usury, beside:
They never prevail'd, till they had wrought my downefall;         45
To have had entertainment with some one or other;
But I am rejected, and scorned of my brother.
Then went I to the Court the gallants to winn,                    50
Goe, goe, threed-bare Conscience, and seeke thee a mate.
Good Lord, long preserve my king, prince, and queene,           55
But they bade away with me, when they knew my name;
For he will undoe us to bye and to sell!                          59
They bade me goe packe me, and hye me for shame;
This is old threed-bare Conscience, that dwelt with saint Peter:
But they wold not admitt me to be a chimney-sweeper.
I having but one poor pennye in my purse,                         65
Then did I remember, and call to my minde,
For my name and the place agreed soe fit;
But there of my purpose I fayled a whit,                          75
Then Westminster-hall was noe place for me;
And fearfull they were, lest there I shold bee!                   80
The silly poore clarkes began for to tremble;
I showed them my cause, and did not dissemble;
But swore me on a booke I must never come there.
Dost thou remember how wee thee found?
We banisht thee the country beyond the salt sea,
And sett thee on shore in the New-found land;
For when we wold reape profitt here thou woldst accuse
To Gentlemens houses of an ancyent name;
Declaring my greeffes, and there I made moane,
They sayd, Fye upon thee! we may thee curse:
And then I was forced a begging to goe
To husbandmens houses, who greeved right sore,                   100
That they were not able to keepe open doore,
Where hepps and hawes, that is my best fare.                   105
Yet within this same desert some comfort I have
Of Mercy, of Pittye, and of Almes-deeds;
Who have vowed to company me to my grave.
The which the riche glutton will answer one day.
Why then, I said to him, me-thinks it were best
To goe to the Clergie; for dailye they preach
Of Mercye, and Pittie, and Almes-'deeds', they teach.
Then laid he him down, and turned him away,                      120
'And' prayd me to goe, and leave him to rest.
"good lord! of my liffe deprive me, I pray
for I silly wretch am ashamed of my name!
my name, "quoth hee," is the cause of my care,
and I cursse my godfathers that gave me the same!"
This excellent old ballad is preserved in the little ancient
miscellany, intitled, _The Garland of Goodwill_.--_Ignorance_ is here
made to speak in the broad Somersetshire dialect. The scene we may
suppose to be Glastonbury Abbey.
God speed you, ancient father,
And give you a good daye;
What is the cause, I praye you
So sadly here you staye?
And that you keep such gazing                                      5
On this decayed place,
The which, for superstition,
Good princes down did raze?
A vair and goodly abbey
Stand here of bricke and stone;
Within these goodly cloysters
Che did full often zee.                                        15
Then I must tell thee, father,
In truthe and veritie,
A sorte of greater hypocrites
Thou couldst not likely see;                                    20
Deceiving of the simple
With false and feigned lies:
But such an order truly
Christ never did devise.
Ah! ah! che zmell thee now, man;                                  25
Che know well what thou art;
A vellow of mean learning,
Thee was not worth a vart:
Vor when we had the old lawe,
A merry world was then;                                         30
And every thing was plenty
Among all zorts of men.
Thou givest me an answer,
As did the Jewes sometimes
Unto the prophet Jeremye,                                         35
When he accus'd their crimes;
'Twas merry, sayd the people,
And joyfull in our rea'me,
When we did offer spice-cakes
Unto the queen of heav'n.                                       40
Chill tell thee what, good vellowe,
Before the vriers went hence,
A bushell of the best wheate
Was zold vor vourteen pence;
And vorty egges a penny,                                          45
That were both good and newe;
And this che zay my zelf have zeene,
And yet ich am no Jewe.
Within the sacred bible
We find it written plain,                                       50
The latter days should troublesome
And dangerous be, certaine;
That we should be self-lovers,
And charity wax colde;
Then 'tis not true religion                                       55
That makes thee grief to holde.
Chill tell thee my opinion plaine,
Ich care not for the bible booke;
Tis too big to be true.
Our blessed ladyes psalter
Zhall for my money goe;
The bible cannot zhowe.
Nowe hast thou spoken trulye,                                     65
For in that book indeede
No mention of our lady,
Or Romish saint we read:
For by the blessed Spirit
That book indited was,                                          70
And not by simple persons,
As was the foolish masse.
That made the masse, che trowe;
Why, man,'tis all in Latine,                                      75
And vools no Latine knowe.
Were not our fathers wise men,
And they did like it well;
Who very much rejoyced
But many kinges and prophets,
As I may say to thee,
Have wisht the light that you have,
And could it never see:
For what art thou the better                                      85
A Latin song to heare,
And understandest nothing,
That they sing in the quiere?
O hold thy peace, che pray thee,
The noise was passing trim                                      90
To heare the vriers zinging,
As we did enter in;
And then to zee the rood-loft
Zo bravely zet with zaints;--
But now to zee them wandring                                      95
My heart with zorrow vaints.
The Lord did give commandment,
No image thou shouldst make,
Nor that unto idolatry
You should your self betake:                                   100
The golden calf of Israel
Moses did therefore spoile;
And Baal's priests and temple
Were brought to utter foile.
But our lady of Walsinghame                                      105
Was a pure and holy zaint,
And many men in pilgrimage
Did shew to her complaint.
Yea with zweet Thomas Becket,
And many other moe:                                            110
Did many wonders zhowe.
Such saints are well agreeing
To your profession sure;
And to the men that made them                                    115
So precious and so pure;
The one for being a traytoure,
Met an untimely death;
The other eke for treason
Did end her hateful breath.                                    120
Yea, yea, it is no matter,
Dispraise them how you wille:
But zure they did much goodnesse;
Would they were with us stille!
We had our holy water,                                           125
And holy bread likewise,
And many holy reliques
We zaw before our eyes.
And all this while they fed you
With vain and empty showe,                                     130
Which never Christ commanded,
As learned doctors knowe:
Search then the holy scriptures,
And thou shalt plainly see
That headlong to damnation                                       135
They alway trained thee.
If it be true, good vellowe,
As thou dost zay to mee,
Unto my heavenly fader
Alone then will I flee:                                        140
Believing in the Gospel,
And passion of his zon,
And with the zubtil papistes
Ich have for ever done.
closen, for houses, closes. _A._
The story of the Wandering Jew is of considerable antiquity: it had
obtained full credit in this part of the world before the year 1228,
as we learn from Mat. Paris. For in that year, it seems, there came an
Armenian archbishop into England, to visit the shrines and reliques
preserved in our churches; who, being entertained at the monastery of
St. Albans, was asked several questions relating to his country, &c.
Among the rest a monk, who sat near him, inquired, "if he had ever seen
or heard of the famous person named Joseph, that was so much talked
of; who was present at our Lord's crucifixion and conversed with him,
and who was still alive in confirmation of the Christian faith." The
archbishop answered, That the fact was true. And afterwards one of his
train, who was well known to a servant of the abbot's, interpreting his
master's words, told them in French, "That his lord knew the person
they spoke of very well: that he had dined at his table but a little
while before he left the East: that he had been Pontius Pilate's
porter, by name Cartaphilus; who, when they were dragging Jesus out of
the door of the Judgment-hall, struck him with his fist on the back,
saying, 'Go faster, Jesus, go faster: why dost thou linger?' Upon
which Jesus looked at him with a frown and said, 'I indeed am going,
but thou shall tarry till I come.' Soon after he was converted, and
baptized by the name of Joseph. He lives for ever, but at the end of
every hundred years falls into an incurable illness, and at length into
a fit or ecstacy, out of which when he recovers, he returns to the same
state of youth he was in when Jesus suffered, being then about thirty
years of age. He remembers all the circumstances of the death and
resurrection of Christ, the saints that arose with him, the composing
of the apostles' creed, their preaching, and dispersion; and is himself
a very grave and holy person." This is the substance of Matthew Paris's
account, who was himself a monk of St. Albans, and was living at the
time when this Armenian archbishop made the above relation.
Since his time several impostors have appeared at intervals under the
name and character of the _Wandering Jew_; whose several histories
may be seen in Calmet's _Dictionary of the Bible_. See also the
_Turkish Spy_, vol. ii. book 3, let. 1. The story that is copied in
the following ballad is of one, who appeared at Hamburgh in 1547, and
pretended he had been a Jewish shoemaker at the time of Christ's
crucifixion.--The ballad however seems to be of later date. It is
preserved in black-letter in the Pepys collection.
numerous theories have been brought forward to account for its
universality; but the only foundation for it appears to be in
Christ's words--"tarry till I come." Mons. Paul Lacroix, however,
suggests that it took its rise in a grand and beautiful allegory
in which the Hebrew race were personified under the figure of the
Everlasting Wanderer. Professor Child makes the following pertinent
remark in his _English and Scottish Ballads_ (vol. viii. p. 78).
"It will be noticed that in the second form of the legend, the
punishment of perpetual existence, which gives rise to the old
names, _Judaeus non mortalis_, _Ewiger Jude_, is aggravated by a
condemnation to incessant change of place, which is indicated by a
corresponding name, _Wandering Jew_, _Juif Errant_, &c."
In the Middle Ages it was supposed by some that Cain was the
Wandering Jew, but the Mahometan belief was fixed upon Samiri, who,
during the absence of Moses, enticed the people to worship the
golden calf. In G. Weil's _The Bible, the Koran, and the Talmud_,
put him to death instantly, but Allah directed that he should be
sent into banishment. Ever since that time he roams like a wild
beast throughout the world; everyone shuns him and purifies the
ground on which his feet have stood; and he himself, whenever he
approaches men, exclaims, 'Touch me not.'" (Quoted in Buckle's
_Common Place Book_. _Works_, vol. ii. p. 502, 1872.)
The legend has been localized in various parts of the world and
connected with other myths. According to Mr. Baring Gould, a
similar curse to that under which the Wandering Jew is living is
supposed to have been inflicted upon the gipsies, on account of
their refusal to shelter the Virgin and Child in the flight into
Egypt.
The last recorded appearance of the Wandering Jew was at Brussels
in April, 1774, and the wanderer's name was Isaac Laquedem. The
name of the Hamburgh impostor, mentioned above by Percy, was
When as in faire Jerusalem
Our Saviour Christ did live,
And for the sins of all the worlde
His own deare life did give;
The wicked Jewes with scoffes and scornes                          5
Did dailye him molest,
That never till he left his life,
Our Saviour could not rest.
When they had crown'd his head with thornes,
And scourg'd him to disgrace,                                   10
In scornfull sort they led him forthe
Unto his dying place;
Where thousand thousands in the streete
Beheld him passe along,
Yet not one gentle heart was there,                               15
That pityed this his wrong.
Both old and young reviled him,
As in the streete he wente,
And nought he found but churlish tauntes,
By every ones consente:                                         20
His owne deare crosse he bore himselfe,
A burthen far too great,
Which made him in the street to fainte,
With blood and water sweat.
Being weary thus, he sought for rest,                             25
To ease his burthened soule,
Upon a stone; the which a wretch
Did churlishly controule;
And sayd, Awaye, thou king of Jewes,
Thou shalt not rest thee here;                                  30
Pass on; thy execution place
Thou seest nowe draweth neare.
And thereupon he thrust him thence;
At which our Saviour sayd,
I sure will rest, but thou shalt walke,                           35
And have no journey stayed.
With that this cursed shoemaker,
For offering Christ this wrong,
Left wife and children, house and all,
And went from thence along.                                     40
Where after he had seene the bloude
Of Jesus Christ thus shed,
And to the crosse his bodye nail'd,
Awaye with speed he fled
Without returning backe againe                                    45
Unto his dwelling place,
And wandred up and downe the worlde,
A runnagate most base.
No resting could he finde at all,
No ease, nor hearts content;                                    50
No house, nor home, nor biding place:
But wandring forth he went
From towne to towne in foreigne landes,
With grieved conscience still,
Repenting for the heinous guilt                                   55
Of his fore-passed ill.
Thus after some fewe ages past
In wandring up and downe;
He much again desired to see
Jerusalems renowne,                                             60
But finding it all quite destroyd,
He wandred thence with woe,
Our Saviours wordes, which he had spoke,
To verifie and showe.
"I'll rest, sayd hee, but thou shalt walke,"                      65
So doth this wandring Jew
From place to place, but cannot rest
For seeing countries newe;
Declaring still the power of him,
Whereas he comes or goes,                                       70
And of all things done in the east,
Since Christ his death, he showes.
The world he hath still compast round
And seene those nations strange,
That hearing of the name of Christ,                               75
Their idol gods doe change:
To whom he hath told wondrous thinges
Of time forepast, and gone,
And to the princes of the worlde
Declares his cause of moane:                                    80
Desiring still to be dissolv'd,
And yeild his mortal breath;
But, if the Lord hath thus decreed,
He shall not yet see death.
For neither lookes he old nor young,                              85
But as he did those times,
When Christ did suffer on the crosse
For mortall sinners crimes.
He hath past through many a foreigne place,
Arabia, Egypt, Africa,                                          90
Grecia, Syria, and great Thrace,
And throughout all Hungaria.
Where Paul and Peter preached Christ,
Those blest apostles deare;
There he hath told our Saviours wordes,                           95
In countries far, and neare.
And lately in Bohemia,
With many a German towne;
And now in Flanders, as tis thought,
He wandreth up and downe:                                      100
Where learned men with him conferre
Of those his lingering dayes,
And wonder much to heare him tell
His journeyes, and his wayes.
If people give this Jew an almes,                                105
The most that he will take
Is not above a groat a time:
Which he, for Jesus' sake,
Will kindlye give unto the poore,
And thereof make no spare,                                     110
Affirming still that Jesus Christ
Of him hath dailye care.
He ne'er was seene to laugh nor smile,
But weepe and make great moane;
Lamenting still his miseries,                                    115
And dayes forepast and gone:
If he heare any one blaspheme,
Or take God's name in vaine,
He telles them that they crucifie
Their Saviour Christe againe.                                  120
If you had seene his death, saith he,
As these mine eyes have done,
Ten thousand thousand times would yee
His torments think upon:
And suffer for his sake all paine                                125
Of torments, and all woes.
These are his wordes and eke his life
Whereas he comes or goes.
Is found in a very scarce miscellany intitled "_Davison's Poems, or
a poeticall Rapsodie divided into sixe books_.... The 4th impression
newly corrected and augmented, and put into a forme more pleasing to
the reader. Lond. 1621, 12mo." This poem is reported to have been
written by its celebrated author the night before his execution, Oct.
the 4th edit. it must have been written long before the death of Sir
Walter: perhaps it was composed soon after his condemnation in 1603.
See Oldys's _Life of Sir W. Raleigh_, p. 173, fol.
Raleigh without evidence and without probability. Ritson affirmed
that F. Davison was the author, and Ellis supported the claims of
Joshua Sylvester, but Dr. Hannah has proved conclusively that it
was really written by Raleigh. It was certainly composed before
his consequent imprisonment in the Tower. Dr. Hannah has brought
together a large amount of illustrative evidence in his interesting
edition of the _Courtly Poets_ (1872), and he shows that the
answerers of the poem attributed it to Raleigh. One of the answers
commences as follows--
"Go, echo of the mind, a careless truth protest;
Make answer that rude Rawly no stomach can digest."
He also draws attention to a transcript of the poem among the
Chetham MSS., made not long after Raleigh's death, and signed "Wa.
Raleigh."
In that remarkable book, _Sylvester's Remains_, printed at the
end of the translation of Du Bartas, 1641, _The Soules Errand_ is
Goe, soule, the bodies guest,
Upon a thankelesse arrant;
Feare not to touche the best,
The truth shall be thy warrant:
Goe, since I needs must dye,                                   5
And give the world the lye.
Goe tell the court, it glowes
And shines like rotten wood;
Goe tell the church it showes
What's good, and doth no good:                                  10
If church and court reply,
Then give them both the lye.
Tell potentates they live
Acting by others actions;
Not lov'd unlesse they give,                                      15
Not strong but by their factions;
If potentates reply,
Give potentates the lye.
Tell men of high condition,
That rule affairs of state,                                     20
Their purpose is ambition,
Their practise onely hate;
And if they once reply,
Then give them all the lye.
Tell them that brave it most,                                     25
They beg for more by spending,
Who in their greatest cost
Seek nothing but commending;
And if they make reply,
Spare not to give the lye.                                    30
Tell zeale, it lacks devotion;
Tell love it is but lust;
Tell time, it is but motion;
Tell flesh, it is but dust;
And wish them not reply,                                      35
For thou must give the lye.
Tell age, it daily wasteth;
Tell honour, how it alters;
Tell beauty, how she blasteth;
Tell favour, how she falters;                                   40
And as they shall reply,
Give each of them the lye.
Tell wit, how much it wrangles
In tickle points of nicenesse;
Tell wisedome, she entangles                                      45
Herselfe in over-wisenesse;
And if they do reply,
Straight give them both the lye.
Tell physicke of her boldnesse;
Tell skill, it is pretension;                                   50
Tell charity of coldness;
Tell law, it is contention;
And as they yield reply,
So give them still the lye.
Tell fortune of her blindnesse;                                   55
Tell nature of decay;
Tell friendship of unkindnesse;
Tell justice of delay:
And if they dare reply,
Then give them all the lye.                                   60
Tell arts, they have no soundnesse,
But vary by esteeming;
Tell schooles, they want profoundnesse,
And stand too much on seeming:
If arts and schooles reply,                                   65
Give arts and schooles the lye.
Tell faith, it's fled the citie;
Tell how the countrey erreth;
Tell, manhood shakes off pitie;
Tell, vertue least preferreth:                                  70
And, if they doe reply,
Spare not to give the lye.
So, when thou hast, as I
Commanded thee, done blabbing,
Although to give the lye                                          75
Deserves no less than stabbing,
Yet stab at thee who will,
No stab the soule can kill.
In the first edition of this book were inserted, by way of specimen
of his majesty's poetic talents, some Punning Verses made on the
disputations at Sterling: but it having been suggested to the Editor,
that the king only gave the quibbling commendations in prose, and
thought proper to exchange them for two _Sonnets_ of K. James's own
composition. James was a great versifier, and therefore out of the
multitude of his poems we have here selected two, which (to shew our
impartiality) are written in his best and his worst manner. The first
would not dishonour any writer of that time; the second is a most
complete example of the Bathos.
his first book was printed at Edinburgh by T. Vautroullier, in
art of Poesie_. The king's next poetical venture was entitled,
_His Majesty's Poeticall Exercises at Vacant Houres_. Printed at
Edinburgh, by Robert Waldegrave, printer to the King's Majesty in
From K. James's works in folio: Where is also printed another called
_his Majesty's_ OWN _Sonnet_; it would perhaps be too cruel to infer
from thence that this was _not_ his Majesty's _own_ Sonnet.
God gives not kings the stile of Gods in vaine,
For on his throne his scepter do they swey:
And as their subjects ought them to obey,
So kings should feare and serve their God againe.
If then ye would enjoy a happie reigne,
Observe the statutes of our heavenly king;
And from his law make all your laws to spring;
Since his lieutenant here ye should remaine.
Rewarde the just, be stedfast, true and plaine;
Represse the proud, maintayning aye the right;
Walke always so, as ever in HIS sight,
Who guardes the godly, plaguing the prophane.
And so ye shall in princely vertues shine,
Resembling right your mightie king divine.
This is printed from Drummond of Hawthornden's works, folio: where also
may be seen some verses of Lord Stirling's upon this Sonnet, which
concludes with the finest Anticlimax I remember to have seen.
How cruelly these catives do conspire?
What loathsome love breeds such a baleful band
That melancholy old and angry sire,
And him, who wont to quench debate and ire                         5
But now his double face is still dispos'd,
With Saturn's help, to freeze us at the fire.
The earth ore-covered with a sheet of snow,
Refuses food to fowl, to bird, and beast:                         10
The chilling cold lets every thing to grow,
And surfeits cattle with a starving feast.
Which kills all creatures, and doth spoil our sport.
The common popular ballad of _King John and the Abbot_ seems to have
been abridged and modernized about the time of James I. from one much
older, intitled, _King John and the Bishop of Canterbury_. The
Editor's folio MS. contains a copy of this last, but in too corrupt a
state to be reprinted; it however afforded many lines worth reviving,
which will be found inserted in the ensuing stanzas.
The archness of the following questions and answers hath been much
admired by our old ballad-makers; for besides the two copies above
mentioned, there is extant another ballad on the same subject (but
of no great antiquity or merit), intitled, _King Olfrey and the
ran against the Bishops, some Puritan worked up the same story into a
very doleful ditty, to a solemn tune, concerning _King Henry and a
Bishop_, with this stinging moral:
"Unlearned men hard matters out can find,
When learned bishops princes eyes do blind."
says that the story upon which it is founded can be traced back
to the fifteenth century, and Dr. Rimbault so traces it to the
_Adventures of Howleglas_, printed in the Lower Saxon dialect
in 1483. Wynkyn de Worde printed in 1511 a collection of riddles
translated from the French, with the title _Demaundes Joyous_,
which are like those propounded by King John to the Abbot. Prof.
Child points out that by this link the ballad is connected with a
tolerably large literature of wit combats of the middle ages. (See
_English and Scottish Ballads_, vol. viii. p. 3.)
Copies of the puritan ballad referred to above are in the Pepys,
Douce, and Roxburghe collections. It commences as follows--
"In Popish times, when bishops proud
In England did bear sway,
Their lordships did like princes live,
And kept all at obey."
The ballad entitled _King John and Bishoppe_, in the folio MS. to
_The following is chiefly printed from an ancient black-letter
copy, to "The tune of Derry down."_
An ancient story Ile tell you anon
Of a notable prince, that was called king John;
And he ruled England with maine and with might,
For he did great wrong, and maintein'd little right.
And Ile tell you a story, a story so merrye,                       5
Concerning the Abbot of Canterburye;
How for his house-keeping, and high renowne,
They rode poste for him to fair London towne.
An hundred men, the king did heare say,
The abbot kept in his house every day;                            10
And fifty golde chaynes, without any doubt,
In velvet coates waited the abbot about.
How now, father abbot, I heare it of thee,
Thou keepest a farre better house than mee,
And for thy house-keeping and high renowne,                       15
I feare thou work'st treason against my crown.
My liege, quo' the abbot, I would it were knowne,
I never spend nothing, but what is my owne;
For spending of my owne true-gotten geere.                        20
Yes, yes, father abbot, thy fault it is highe,
And now for the same thou needest must dye;
For except thou canst answer me questions three,
Thy head shall be smitten from thy bodie.
And first, quo' the king, when I'm in this stead,                 25
With my crowne of golde so faire on my head,
Among all my liege-men so noble of birthe,
Thou must tell me to one penny what I am worthe.
Secondlye, tell me, without any doubt,
How soone I may ride the whole worlde about.                      30
And at the third question thou must not shrink,
But tell me here truly what I do think.
O, these are hard questions for my shallow witt,
Nor I cannot answer your grace as yet:
But if you will give me but three weekes space,                   35
Ile do my endeavour to answer your grace.
Now three weeks space to thee will I give,
And that is the longest time thou hast to live;
For if thou dost not answer my questions three,
Thy lands and thy livings are forfeit to mee.                     40
Away rode the abbot all sad at that word,
And he rode to Cambridge, and Oxenford;
But never a doctor there was so wise,
That could with his learning an answer devise.
Then home rode the abbot of comfort so cold,                      45
And he mett his shepheard a going to fold:
How now, my lord abbot, you are welcome home;
What newes do you bring us from good king John?
"Sad newes, sad newes, shepheard, I must give;
That I have but three days more to live:                          50
For if I do not answer him questions three,
My head will be smitten from my bodie.
The first is to tell him there in that stead,
With his crowne of golde so fair on his head,
Among all his liege men so noble of birth,                        55
To within one penny of what he is worth.
The seconde, to tell him, without any doubt,
How soone he may ride this whole world about:
And at the third question I must not shrinke,
But tell him there truly what he does thinke."                    60
Now cheare up, sire abbot, did you never hear yet,
That a fool he may learn a wise man witt?
Lend me horse, and serving men, and your apparel,
And I'll ride to London to answere your quarrel.
Nay frowne not, if it hath bin told unto mee,                     65
I am like your lordship, as ever may bee:
And if you will but lend me your gowne,
There is none shall knowe us at fair London towne.
"Now horses, and serving-men thou shalt have,
With sumptuous array most gallant and brave;                      70
With crozier, and miter, and rochet, and cope,
Fit to appeare 'fore our fader the pope."
Now welcome, sire abbot, the king he did say,
Tis well thou'rt come back to keepe thy day;
For and if thou canst answer my questions three,                  75
Thy life and thy living both saved shall bee.
And first, when thou seest me here in this stead.
With my crown of golde so fair on my head,
Among all my liege-men so noble of birthe,
Tell me to one penny what I am worth.                             80
"For thirty pence our Saviour was sold
Amonge the false Jewes, as I have bin told;
And twenty nine is the worth of thee,
For I thinke, thou art one penny worser than hee."
I did not think I had been worth so littel!
--Now secondly tell me, without any doubt,
How soone I may ride this whole world about.
"You must rise with the sun, and ride with the same,
Until the next morning he riseth againe;                          90
And then your grace need not make any doubt,
But in twenty-four hours you'll ride it about."
The king he laughed, and swore by St. Jone,
I did not think, it could be gone so soone!
--Now from the third question thou must not shrinke,
But tell me here truly what I do thinke.                          96
"Yea, that shall I do, and make your grace merry:
You thinke I'm the abbot of Canterbury;
But I'm his poor shepheard, as plain you may see,
That am come to beg pardon for him and for mee."
The king he laughed, and swore by the masse,                     101
Ile make thee lord abbot this day in his place!
"Now naye, my liege, be not in such speede,
For alacke I can neither write, ne reade."
Four nobles a weeke, then I will give thee,                      105
For this merry jest thou hast showne unto mee;
And tell the old abbot when thou comest home,
Thou hast brought him a pardon from good king John.
edition of the Percy Folio, vol. i. p. 508.
Off an ancient story Ile tell you anon,
of a notable prince that was called King Iohn,
in England was borne, with maine and with might
hee did much wrong, and mainteined litle right.                    4
this noble prince was vexed in veretye,
for he was angry with the bishopp of canterbury
ffor his house-keeping and his good cheere,
the rode post for him, as you shall heare;                         8
they rode post for him very hastilye;
the King sayd the bishopp kept a better house then hee;
a 100 men euen, as I say,
the Bishopp kept in his house euerye day,                         12
and 50 gold chaines without any doubt,
in veluett coates waited the Bishopp about.
the Bishopp, he came to the court anon
before his prince that was called King Iohn.                      16
as soone as the Bishopp the King did see,
"O," quoth the King, "Bishopp, thou art welcome to mee!
there is noe man soe welcome to towne
as thou that workes treason against my crowne."                   20
"My leege," quoth the Bishopp, "I wold it were knowne;
I spend, your grace, nothing but that thats my owne;
I trust your grace will doe me noe deare
for spending my owne trew gotten geere."                          24
"Yes," quoth the King, "Bishopp, thou must needs dye:
eccept thou can answere mee questions 3,
thy head shalbe smitten quite from thy bodye,
and all thy liuing remayne vnto mee.                              28
"first," quoth the King, "tell me in this steade,
with this crowne of gold heere vpon my head,
amongst my Nobilitye with Ioy and much Mirth,
lett me know within one pennye what I am worth:                   32
Secondlye, tell me without any dowbt
how soone I may goe the whole world about:
and thirdly, tell mee or euer I stinte,
what is the thing, Bishopp, that I doe thinke.                    36
and come againe and answere mee."
the Bishopp bade the King 'god night' att a word.
he rode betwixt Cambridge and Oxenford,                           40
but neuer a Doctor there was soe wise
cold shew him these questions or enterprise;
wherewith the Bishopp was nothing gladd,
but in his hart was heauy and sadd,                               44
and hyed him home to a house in the countrye
To ease some part of his Melanchollye.
his halfe brother dwelt there, was feirce & fell,
noe better but a shepard to the Bishoppe him-sell;                48
the shepard came to the Bishopp anon,
saying, "my Lord, you are welcome home!
what ayles you," quoth the shepard, "that you are soe sadd,
and had wonte to haue beene soe merry & gladd?"                   52
"Nothing," quoth the Bishopp, "I ayle att this time,
will not thee availe to know, Brother mine."
"Brother," quoth the Shepeard, "you haue heard itt,
that a ffoole may teach a wisemane witt;                          56
say me therfore what-soeuer you will,
and if I doe you noe good, Ile doe you noe ill."
Quoth the Bishop: "I have beene att thy court anon,
before my prince is called King Iohn,                             60
and there he hath charged mee
against his crowne with traitorye;
if I cannot answer his misterye,
he will haue my Land soe faire and free,
and alsoe the head from my bodye.
the first question was, 'to tell him in that stead
with the crowne of gold vpon his head,                            68
amongst his nobilitye with Ioy & much mirth,
to lett him know within one penye what hee is worth;'
and secondlye 'to tell him with-out any doubt
how soone he may goe the whole world about;'                      72
and thirdlye, 'to tell him, or ere I stint,
what is the thing that he does thinke.'"
"Brother," quoth the shepard, "you are a man of Learninge;
what neede you stand in doubt of soe small a thinge?              76
lend me," quoth the shepard, "your ministers apparrell,
Ile ryde to the court and answere your quarrell;
lend me your serving men, say me not nay;
with all your best horsses that ryd on the way,                   80
Ile to the court, this matter to stay;
Ile speake with King Iohn & heare what heele say."
the Bishopp with speed prepared then
to sett forth the shepard with horsse and man;                    84
the shepard was liuely with-out any doubt;
I wott a royall companye came to the court.
the shepard hee came to the court anon
before (his) prince that was called King Iohn.                    88
as soone as the king the shepard did see,
"O," quoth the king, "Bishopp, thou art welcome to me!"
the shepard was soe like the Bishopp his brother,
the King cold not know the one from the other.                    92
Quoth the King, "Bishopp, thou art welcome to me
if thou can answer me my questions 3!"
said the shepeard, "if it please your grace,
"first" quoth the king, "tell mee in this stead
with the crowne of gold vpon my head,
amongst my nobilitye with Ioy and much mirth,
within one pennye what I am worth."                              100
Quoth the shepard, "to make your grace noe offence,
I thinke you are worth 29 pence;
for our Lord Iesus, that bought vs all,
for 30 pence was sold into thrall                                104
amongst the cursed Iewes, as I to you doe showe;
but I know christ was one penye better then you."
then the King laught, and swore by St Andrew
he was not thought to bee of such a small value.                 108
"Secondlye, tell mee with-out any doubt
how soone I may goe the world round about,"
saies the shepard, "it is noe time with your grace to scorne;
but rise betime with the sun in the morne,                       112
and follow his course till his vprising,
and then you may know with-out any Leasing--
and this your grace shall proue the same--
you are come to the same place from whence you came;             116
your grace may the world goe round about;
the world round about, euen as I doe say,
if with the sun you can goe the next way."                       120
"and thirdlye tell me or euer I stint,
what is the thing, Bishoppe, that I doe thinke."
"that shall I doe," quoth the shepeard, "for veretye
you thinke I am the Bishopp of Canterburye,"                     124
"why? art not thou? the truth tell to me;
for I doe thinke soe," quoth the king, "by St. Marye."
"not soe," quoth the shepeard; "the truth shalbe knowne,
I am his poore shepeard; my brother is att home."                128
"why," quoth the King, "if itt soe bee,
Ile make thee Bishopp here to mee."
"Noe Sir" quoth the shepard, "I pray you be still,
for Ile not bee Bishop but against my will;                      132
for I am not fitt for any such deede,
for I can neither write nor reede."
"why then," quoth the king, "Ile giue thee cleere
a patten of 300 pound a yeere;                                   136
that I will giue thee franke and free;
take thee that, shepard, for coming to me:
free pardon Ile giue," the kings grace said,
"to saue the Bishopp, his land and his head;                     140
with him nor thee Ile be nothing wrath;
here is the pardon for him and thee both."
then the shepard he had noe more to say,
but tooke the pardon and rode his way.                           144
when he came to the Bishopps place,
the Bishopp asket anon how all things was:
"Brother," quoth the Shepard, "I haue well sped,
for I haue saued both your Land & your head;                     148
the King with you is nothing wrath,
for heere is the pardon for you and mee both."
then the Bishopes hart was of a merry cheere,
"brother, thy paines Ile quitt them cleare,                      152
for I will giue thee a patent to thee & to thine
of 50^{li}. a yeere land good and fine."
"I will to thee noe longer croche nor creepe,
nor Ile serue thee noe more to keepe thy sheepe."                156
whereeuer wist you shepard before,
that had in his head witt such store
to pleasure a Bishopp in such a like case,
to answer 3 questions to the Kings grace?                        160
whereeuer wist you shepard gett cleare
I neuer hard of his fellow before,
nor I neuer shall, now I need to say noe more:                   164
I neuer knew shepeard that gott such a liuinge
But David the shepeard that was a King.
supposes _Olfrey_ to be a corruption of _Alfred_, in his pamphlet
concerning the _White Horse_ in Berkshire, p. 15.
This little Sonnet was written by Sir _Henry Wotton_, Knight, on that
amiable Princess, Elizabeth daughter of James I. and wife of the
Elector Palatine, who was chosen King of Bohemia, Sept. 5, 1619. The
consequences of this fatal election are well known: Sir Henry Wotton,
who in that and the following year was employed in several embassies
in Germany on behalf of this unfortunate lady, seems to have had an
uncommon attachment to her merit and fortunes, for he gave away a jewel
worth a thousand pounds, that was presented to him by the Emperor,
"because it came from an enemy to his royal mistress the Queen of
Bohemia." See _Biog. Britan_.
This song is printed from the _Reliquiae Wottonianae_, 1651, with some
corrections from an old MS. copy.
was called by those who knew her and were won by her sweetness,
spirit, wit, and unselfishness--the Queen of Hearts) has been very
frequently reprinted. The unfortunate princess was also named the
_Snow Queen_ and her husband the _Winter King_, in allusion to
the fact that their reign at Prague only lasted one winter. The
poem first appeared, according to Dr. Rimbault, in "The Sixt Set
of Bookes, wherein are Anthemes for Versus and Chorus of 5 and 6
Parts; apt for Violls and Voyces: newly composed by Michaell Est,
Bachelor of Musicke, and Master of the Choristers of the Cathedrall
Church in Litchfield," London, 1624, 4to. It is printed in _Wit's
Recreations_, 1640, and _Wit's Interpreter_, 1671, and in "Songs
and Fancies to severall Musicall parts, both apt for Voices and
Viols," Aberdeen, 1682. Alterations were made in the various
copies, and in the latter book a wretched second part, quite out of
harmony with the original, was added. It has found its way, with
some variations, among Montrose's poems (see Napier's _Life of
Montrose_, 1856, _Appendix_, p. xl.), and Robert Chambers (ignorant
of the Englishman Sir Henry Wotton's claim to the authorship)
actually printed it in his _Scottish Songs_ (vol. ii. p. 631) as if
"written by Darnley in praise of the beauty of Queen Mary before
their marriage."
Percy, while copying from the _Reliquiae Wottonianae_, 1651,
transposed stanzas 2 and 3. In Abp. Sancroft's MS. (Tanner, 465,
fol. 43) the following verses occur as stanzas 4 and 6 of the whole
poem:--
"You rubies, that do gems adorn,
And sapphires with your azure hue
Like to the skies, or blushing morn,
How pale's your brightness in our view
When diamonds are mixed with you.
"The rose, the violet, all the spring
Unto her breath, for sweetness run;
The diamond's dark'ned in the ring
If she appear, the moon's undone,
You meaner beauties of the night,
That poorly satisfie our eies
More by your number, than your light;
You common people of the skies,
What are you when the Moon shall rise?                             5
Ye violets that first appeare,
By your pure purple mantles known
Like the proud virgins of the yeare,
As if the Spring were all your own;
What are you when the Rose is blown?                            10
Ye curious chaunters of the wood,
That warble forth dame Nature's layes,
Thinking your passions understood
By your weak accents: what's your praise,
When Philomell her voyce shall raise?                           15
So when my mistris shal be seene
In sweetnesse of her looks and minde;
By virtue first, then choyce a queen;
Tell me, if she was not design'd
Th' eclypse and glory of her kind?                              20
This excellent old song, the subject of which is a comparison between
the manners of the old gentry, as still subsisting in the times of
Elizabeth, and the modern refinements affected by their sons in the
reigns of her successors, is given, with corrections, from an ancient
black-letter copy in the Pepys collection, compared with another
printed among some miscellaneous "poems and songs" in a book intitled,
_Le Prince d'amour_, or _The Prince of Love_, 1660, 8vo.
his Preface to the _Art of Cookery_ places it by the side of
_Chevy Chase_ as one of the ballads to be hung up over the carved
mantelpiece in the homes of old British hospitality. It is to be
found in broadside in nearly all the collections, and appears to
have been printed for the first time in the reign of James I. by T.
Symcocke. Pepys notices it in his _Diary_ under the date 16th June,
old Courtier of Queen Elizabeth's, and how he was changed upon the
coming in of the King, did please me mightily, and I did cause W.
Hewer to write it out."
The song was parodied and altered into many forms. About the
middle of the last century it was revived and sung by Mr. Vernon
in Shadwell's comedy, _The Squire of Alsatia_, with a new burden,
"moderation and alteration," and finally it has been again revived
in the present century, with still greater alterations, under the
title of _The Old English Gentleman_.
Mr. Chappell has the following note on the object of the
song:--"Southey remarks very justly on the complaints of the decay
of hospitality, that 'while rents were received in kind they
must have been chiefly consumed in kind; at least there could be
no accumulation of disposable wealth.' He supposes this mode of
payment to have fallen generally into disuse during the reign of
James I. Without doubt, many of the poor would feel the change."
An old song made by an aged old pate,
Of an old worshipful gentleman, who had a greate estate,
That kept a brave old house at a bountiful rate,
And an old porter to relieve the poor at his gate;
Like an old courtier of the queen's,
And the queen's old courtier.
With an old lady, whose anger one word asswages;
They every quarter paid their old servants their wages,
And never knew what belong'd to coachmen, footmen, nor pages,
But kept twenty old fellows with blue coats and badges;
Like an old courtier, &c.
With an old study fill'd full of learned old books,
With an old reverend chaplain, you might know him by his looks.
With an old buttery hatch worn quite off the hooks,
And an old kitchen, that maintain'd half a dozen old cooks:
Like an old courtier, &c.
With an old hall, hung about with pikes, guns, and bows,
With old swords, and bucklers, that had borne many shrewde blows,
And an old frize coat, to cover his worship's trunk hose,
And a cup of old sherry, to comfort his copper nose;
Like an old courtier, &c.
With a good old fashion, when Christmasse was come,
To call in all his old neighbours with bagpipe and drum,
With good chear enough to furnish every old room,
And old liquor able to make a cat speak, and man dumb,
Like an old courtier, &c.
With an old falconer, huntsman, and a kennel of hounds,
That never hawked, nor hunted, but in his own grounds,
Who, like a wise man, kept himself within his own bounds,
And when he dyed gave every child a thousand good pounds;
Like an old courtier, &c.
But to his eldest son his house and land he assign'd,
Charging him in his will to keep the old bountifull mind,
To be good to his old tenants, and to his neighbours be kind:
But in the ensuing ditty you shall hear how he was inclin'd;
Like a young courtier of the king's,
And the king's young courtier.
Like a flourishing young gallant, newly come to his land,
Who keeps a brace of painted madams at his command,
And takes up a thousand pound upon his father's land,
And gets drunk in a tavern, till he can neither go nor stand;
Like a young courtier, &c.
With a new-fangled lady, that is dainty, nice, and spare,
Who never knew what belong'd to good house-keeping, or care,
Who buyes gaudy-color'd fans to play with wanton air,
And seven or eight different dressings of other womens hair;
Like a young courtier, &c.
With a new-fashion'd hall, built where the old one stood,
Hung round with new pictures, that do the poor no good,
With a fine marble chimney, wherein burns neither coal nor wood,
And a new smooth shovelboard, whereon no victuals ne'er stood;
Like a young courtier, &c.
With a new study, stuft full of pamphlets, and plays,
And a new chaplain, that swears faster than he prays,
With a new buttery hatch, that opens once in four or five days,
And a new French cook, to devise fine kickshaws, and toys;
Like a young courtier, &c.
With a new fashion, when Christmas is drawing on,
On a new journey to London straight we all must begone,
And leave none to keep house, but our new porter John,
Who relieves the poor with a thump on the back with a stone;
Like a young courtier, &c.
With a new gentleman-usher, whose carriage is compleat,
With a new coachman, footmen, and pages to carry up the meat,
With a waiting-gentlewoman, whose dressing is very neat,
Who when her lady has din'd, lets the servants not eat;
Like a young courtier, &c.
With new titles of honour bought with his father's old gold,
For which sundry of his ancestors old manors are sold;
And this is the course most of our new gallants hold,
Which makes that good house-keeping is now grown so cold,
Among the young courtiers of the king,
Or the king's young courtiers.
When the Scottish covenanters rose up in arms, and advanced to the
English borders in 1639, many of the courtiers complimented the
king by raising forces at their own expence. Among these none were
more distinguished than the gallant Sir John Suckling, who raised a
troop of horse, so richly accoutred, that it cost him _L_12,000. The
like expensive equipment of other parts of the army, made the king
remark, that "the Scots would fight stoutly, if it were but for the
Englishmen's fine cloaths." (Lloyd's _Memoirs_.) When they came to
action, the rugged Scots proved more than a match for the fine shewy
English: many of whom behaved remarkably ill, and among the rest this
splendid troop of Sir John Suckling's.
This humorous pasquil has been generally supposed to have been written
by Sir John, as a banter upon himself. Some of his contemporaries
however attributed it to Sir John Mennis, a wit of those times, among
whose poems it is printed in a small poetical miscellany, intitled,
_Musarum deliciae: or the Muses recreation, containing several pieces
of poetique wit_, 2d edition.--By Sir J. M. (_Sir John Mennis_) and Ja.
S. (_James Smith_.) Lond. 1656, 12mo.--(See Wood's _Athenae_. ii. 397,
was written by this Sir John Mennis, viz.:--
"But now there is peace, he's return'd to increase
His money, which lately he spent-a,
But his lost honour must lye still in the dust;
At Barwick away it went-a."
commencing.--
"As it fell on a holiday
And upon a holytide-a
John Dory bought him an ambling nag
To Paris for to ride-a."
Suckling's satirical powers made him peculiarly odious to
the Parliamentarians, as they were turned against them, and
consequently Mennis's lampoon was a great favourite with the
Roundheads. In _Le Prince d'Amour_, 1660, there is a song _Upon
Sir John Suckling's 100 Horse_, and the following are two of the
seven stanzas of which it consists:--
"I tell thee, Jack, thou gav'st the king
So rare a present, that nothing
Could welcomer have been;
A hundred horse! beshrew my heart,
It was a brave heroic part,
The like will scarce be seen.
"For ev'ry horse shall have on's back
A man as valiant as Sir Jack,
Although not half so witty:
Yet I did hear the other day
Two tailors made seven run away
Good faith, the more's the pity."
The uniform adopted by Suckling for his troop consisted of a white
doublet, and scarlet coat and breeches, with a scarlet feather in
the bonnet. The men were vigorous, well mounted and armed, and
these famous 100 horsemen were considered to be the finest sight in
his majesty's army. Mr. W. C. Hazlitt points out that the earliest
news of them appears to be in a letter of Jan. 29, 1638-9, from the
Earl of Northumberland to Lord Conway, in which the writer speaks
of Suckling having then engaged himself to raise the troop "within
these three days." (_Calendar of State Papers_ (_Domestic_,)
Sir John he got him an ambling nag,
To Scotland for to ride-a,
With a hundred horse more, all his own he swore,
To guard him on every side-a.
No Errant-knight ever went to fight                                5
With halfe so gay a bravada,
Had you seen but his look, you'ld have sworn on a book,
Hee'ld have conquer'd a whole armada.
The ladies ran all to the windows to see
So gallant and warlike a sight-a,                               10
And as he pass'd by, they said with a sigh,
Sir John, why will you go fight-a?
But he, like a cruel knight, spurr'd on;
His heart would not relent-a,
For, till he came there, what had he to fear?                     15
Or why should he repent-a?
The king (God bless him!) had singular hopes
Of him and all his troop-a:
The borderers they, as they met him on the way,
For joy did hollow, and whoop-a.                                20
None lik'd him so well, as his own colonell,
But when there were shows of gunning and blows,
My gallant was nothing so pert-a.
For when the Scots army came within sight,                        25
And all prepared to fight-a,
He ran to his tent, they ask'd what he meant,
The colonell sent for him back agen,
To quarter him in the van-a,                                    30
But Sir John did swear, he would not come there,
To be kill'd the very first man-a.
To cure his fear, he was sent to the reare,
Some ten miles back, and more-a;
Where Sir John did play at trip and away,                         35
And ne'er saw the enemy more-a.
and the terror of the French in the reign of Louis XIII. Hence his
name became proverbial in France, where he was called _De Vert_. See
Bayle's _Dict._
This excellent sonnet, which possessed a high degree of fame among
the old Cavaliers, was written by Colone, Richard Lovelace during his
confinement in the gatehouse, Westminster: to which he was committed
by the House of Commons, in April 1642, for presenting a petition from
the county of Kent, requesting them to restore the king to his rights,
and to settle the government. See Wood's _Athenae_, vol. ii. p. 228,
and Lysons' _Environs of London_, vol. i. p. 109; where may be seen at
large the affecting story of this elegant writer, who after having
been distinguished for every gallant and polite accomplishment, the
pattern of his own sex, and the darling of the ladies, died in the
lowest wretchedness, obscurity, and want, in 1658.
This song is printed from a scarce volume of his poems intitled,
_Lucasta_, 1649, 12mo. collated with a copy in the Editor's folio MS.
from it (ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. ii. p. 17), but it will
at once be seen that they are of little value. The music to this
most exquisite of prison songs was composed by the celebrated Dr.
John Wilson, and first printed (according to Dr. Rimbault) in his
_Cheerful Ayres or Ballads set for three Voices_, Oxford, 1660.
Lucasta (= Lux casta, Lucy Sacheverell), misled by a report
that Lovelace had died of his wounds received at Dunkirk while
commanding a regiment of his own forming in the service of the
French king, married another lover.
Although doubtless Lovelace died in great trouble, we may hope
that Wood's account of his extreme poverty is exaggerated, for his
daughter and sole heir married the son of Lord Chief Justice Coke,
and brought to her husband the estates of her father at Kingsdown
When love with unconfined wings
Hovers within my gates,
And my divine Althea brings
To whisper at my grates;
When I lye tangled in her haire,                                   5
And fetter'd with her eye,
The birds that wanton in the aire,
When flowing cups run swiftly round
Our carelesse heads with roses crown'd,
Our hearts with loyal flames;
Fishes, that tipple in the deepe,                                 15
When, linnet-like, confined I
With shriller note shall sing
When I shall voyce aloud how good
He is, how great should be,
Stone walls doe not a prison make,                                25
Nor iron barres a cage,
If I have freedom in my love,
And in my soule am free,                                        30
water in general.
Charing-Cross, as it stood before the civil wars, was one of those
beautiful Gothic obelisks erected to conjugal affection by Edward I.,
who built such a one wherever the herse of his beloved Eleanor rested
in its way from Lincolnshire to Westminster. But neither its ornamental
situation, the beauty of its structure, nor the noble design of its
erection (which did honour to humanity), could preserve it from the
merciless zeal of the times: For, in 1647, it was demolished by order
of the House of Commons, as popish and superstitious. This occasioned
the following not unhumorous sarcasm, which has been often printed
among the popular sonnets of those times.
The plot referred to in ver. 17, was that entered into by Mr. Waller
the poet, and others, with a view to reduce the city and tower to the
service of the king; for which two of them, Nath. Tomkins and Rich.
Chaloner, suffered death July 5, 1643. Vid. _Ath. Ox._ ii. 24.
Whitlocke says, "May 3, 1643, Cheapside cross and other crosses were
voted down," &c.--But this Vote was not put in execution with regard
to _Charing Cross_ till four years after, as appears from Lilly's
_Observations on the Life, &c. of K. Charles_, viz. "Charing-Cross, we
know, was pulled down, 1647, in June, July, and August. Part of the
Stones were converted to pave before Whitehall. I have seen Knife-hafts
made of some of the stones, which, being well-polished, looked like
marble." Ed, 1715, p. 18, 12mo.
See an Account of the pulling down Cheapside Cross, in the Supplement
to _Gent. Mag._ 1764.
Eleanor crosses, and the architects employed in the construction of
it were paid _L_450. The work was formerly attributed to Cavalini,
but that artist was not born until the year 1279, and was therefore
about eleven years old when the Queen died. Since the publication
of the very interesting rolls of payments made by the executors
of Queen Eleanor (_Manners and Household Expenses of England in
the 13th and 15th centuries._ Roxburghe Club, 1841), it has been
known that Charing Cross was commenced by Richard de Crundale and
completed, after his death, by Roger de Crundale.
The site of the old cross was made use of as a place of execution,
and several of the regicides were put to death there.
The Cheapside cross, which was taken down in 1643, was the third
which occupied the site, and it had only been erected in 1600. The
original cross was found to be in a bad condition in 1441, and a
new one was therefore commenced, which was not finished until 1486.
This was replaced in 1600 by the third cross.
Dr. Rimbault informs us that this ballad is printed with the music
for three voices by "Mr. F. Farmeloe" in "The Second Book of the
Undone, undone the lawyers are,
They wander about the towne,
Nor can find the way to Westminster,
Now Charing-cross is downe:
At the end of the Strand, they make a stand,                       5
Swearing they are at a loss,
And chaffing say, that's not the way,
They must go by Charing-cross.
The parliament to vote it down
Conceived it very fitting,                                      10
For fear it should fall, and kill them all,
In the house, as they were sitting.
They were told god-wot, it had a plot,
Which made them so hard-hearted,
To give command, it should not stand,                             15
But be taken down and carted.
Men talk of plots, this might have been worse
For any thing I know,
Than that Tomkins, and Chaloner,
Were hang'd for long agoe.                                      20
Our parliament did that prevent,
And wisely them defended,
For plots they will discover still,
Before they were intended.
But neither man, woman, nor child,                                25
Will say, I'm confident,
They ever heard it speak one word
Against the parliament.
An informer swore, it letters bore,
Or else it had been freed;                                      30
I'll take, in troth, my Bible oath,
It could neither write, nor read.
The committee said, that verily
To popery it was bent;
For ought I know, it might be so,                                 35
For to church it never went.
What with excise, and such device,
The kingdom doth begin
To think you'll leave them ne'er a cross,
Without doors nor within.                                       40
Methinks the common-council shou'd
Of it have taken pity,
'Cause, good old cross, it always stood
So firmly to the city.
Since crosses you so much disdain,                                45
Faith, if I were as you,
For fear the king should rule again,
I'd pull down Tiburn too.
This excellent old song is preserved in David Lloyd's _Memoires of
those that suffered in the cause of Charles I._ Lond. 1668, fol. p. 96.
He speaks of it as the composition of a worthy personage, who suffered
deeply in those times, and was still living with no other reward
than the conscience of having suffered. The author's name he has not
mentioned, but, if tradition may be credited, this song was written by
Sir _Roger L'Estrange_.--Some mistakes in Lloyd's copy are corrected by
two others, one in MS., the other in the _Westminster Drollery, or a
choice Collection of Songs and Poems_, 1671, 12mo.
Beat on, proud billows; Boreas blow;
Swell, curled waves, high as Jove's roof;
Your incivility doth show,
That innocence is tempest proof;
Though surly Nereus frown, my thoughts are calm;                   5
Then strike, Affliction, for thy wounds are balm.
That which the world miscalls a jail,
A private closet is to me:
Whilst a good conscience is my bail,
And innocence my liberty:                                     10
Locks, bars, and solitude, together met,
Make me no prisoner, but an anchoret.
I, whilst I wisht to be retir'd,
Into this private room was turn'd;
As if their wisdoms had conspir'd                               15
The salamander should be burn'd;
Or like those sophists, that would drown a fish,
I am constrain'd to suffer what I wish.
The cynick loves his poverty;
The pelican her wilderness;                                   20
And 'tis the Indian's pride to be
Naked on frozen Caucasus:
Contentment cannot smart, Stoicks we see
Make torments easie to their apathy.
These manacles upon my arm                                      25
I, as my mistress' favours, wear;
And for to keep my ancles warm,
I have some iron shackles there:
These walls are but my garrison; this cell,
Which men call jail, doth prove my citadel.                       30
I'm in the cabinet lockt up,
Or, like the great mogul or pope,
Am cloyster'd up from publick sight:
Retiredness is a piece of majesty,                                35
And thus, proud sultan, I'm as great as thee.
Here sin for want of food must starve,
Where tempting objects are not seen;
And these strong walls do only serve
To keep vice out, and keep me in:                             40
Malice of late's grown charitable sure,
I'm not committed, but am kept secure.
Thinking t'have made his purpose sure,
By a malicious friendly knife                                   45
Did only wound him to a cure:
Malice, I see, wants wit; for what is meant
Mischief, oft-times proves favour by th' event.
When once my prince affliction hath,
Prosperity doth treason seem;                                 50
And to make smooth so rough a path,
I can learn patience from him:
Now not to suffer shews no loyal heart,
When kings want ease subjects must bear a part.
What though I cannot see my king                                55
Neither in person or in coin;
Yet contemplation is a thing
That renders what I have not, mine;
My king from me what adamant can part,
Whom I do wear engraven on my heart?                              60
Have you not seen the nightingale,
A prisoner like, coopt in a cage,
How doth she chaunt her wonted tale
In that her narrow hermitage?
Even then her charming melody doth prove,                         65
That all her bars are trees, her cage a grove.
I am that bird, whom they combine
Thus to deprive of liberty;
But though they do my corps confine,
Yet maugre hate, my sould is free:                            70
And though immur'd yet can I chirp, and sing
Disgrace to rebels, glory to my king.
My soul is free, as ambient air,
Although my baser part's immew'd,
Whilst loyal thoughts do still repair                           75
T' accompany my solitude:
Although rebellion do my body binde,
My king alone can captivate my minde.
"This prince, like his father, did not confine himself to prose:
Bishop Burnet has given us a pathetic elegy, said to be written by
Charles in Carisbrook castle (in 1648). The poetry is most uncouth and
unharmonious, but there are strong thoughts in it, some good sense, and
a strain of majestic piety." Mr. Walpole's _Royal and Noble Authors_,
vol. i.
It is in his _Memoirs of the Duke of Hamilton_, p. 379, that Burnet
hath preserved this elegy, which he tells us he had from a gentleman,
who waited on the king at the time when it was written, and copied it
out from the original. It is there intitled, _Majesty in Misery: or
An Imploration to the King of Kings_.
Hume hath remarked of these stanzas, "That the truth of the sentiment,
rather than the elegance of expression, renders them very pathetic."
See his _Hist._ 1763, 4to. vol. v. pp. 437, 442, which is no bad
comment upon them.--These are almost the only verses known of Charles's
composition. Indeed a little Poem _On a quiet Conscience_, printed in
the _Poetical Calendar_, 1763, vol. viii. is attributed to _K. Charles
I._; being reprinted from a thin 8vo. published by Nahum Tate, called
_Miscellanea Sacra, or Poems on Divine and Moral Subjects_.
Great monarch of the world, from whose power springs
The potency and power of kings,
Record the royal woe my suffering sings;
And teach my tongue, that ever did confine
Its faculties in truth's seraphick line,                           5
To track the treasons of thy foes and mine.
Nature and law, by thy divine decree,
(The only root of righteous royaltie)
With this dim diadem invested me:
With it, the sacred scepter, purple robe,                         10
The holy unction, and the royal globe:
Yet am I levell'd with the life of Job.
The fiercest furies, that do daily tread
Upon my grief, my grey discrowned head,
Are those that owe my bounty for their bread.                     15
They raise a war, and christen it THE CAUSE,
While sacrilegious hands have best applause,
Plunder and murder are the kingdom's laws;
Tyranny bears the title of taxation,
Revenge and robbery are reformation,                              20
Oppression gains the name of sequestration.
My loyal subjects, who in this bad season
Attend me (by the law of God and reason),
They dare impeach, and punish for high treason.
Next at the clergy do their furies frown,                         25
Pious episcopacy must go down,
They will destroy the crosier and the crown.
Churchmen are chain'd, and schismaticks are freed,
Mechanicks preach, and holy fathers bleed,
The crown is crucified with the creed.                            30
The church of England doth all factions foster,
The pulpit is usurpt by each impostor,
_Extempore_ excludes the _Paternoster_.
The Presbyter, and Independent seed
Springs with broad blades. To make religion bleed
Herod and Pontius Pilate are agreed.                              36
The corner stone's misplac'd by every pavier:
With such a bloody method and behaviour
Their ancestors did crucifie our Saviour.
My royal consort, from whose fruitful womb                        40
So many princes legally have come,
Is forc'd in pilgrimage to seek a tomb.
Great Britain's heir is forced into France,
Whilst on his father's head his foes advance:
Poor child! he weeps out his inheritance.                         45
With my own power my majesty they wound,
In the king's name the king himself's uncrown'd:
So doth the dust destroy the diamond.
With propositions daily they enchant
My people's ears, such as do reason daunt,                        50
And the Almighty will not let me grant.
They promise to erect my royal stem,
To make me great, t' advance my diadem,
If I will first fall down, and worship them!
But for refusal they devour my thrones,                           55
Distress my children, and destroy my bones;
I fear they'll force me to make bread of stones.
My life they prize at such a slender rate,
That in my absence they draw bills of hate,
To prove the king a traytor to the state.                         60
Felons obtain more privilege than I,
They are allow'd to answer ere they die;
'Tis death for me to ask the reason, why.
But, sacred Saviour, with thy words I woo
Thee to forgive, and not be bitter to                             65
Such, as thou know'st do not know what they do.
For since they from their lord are so disjointed,
As to contemn those edicts he appointed,
How can they prize the power of his anointed?
Augment my patience, nullifie my hate,                            70
Preserve my issue, and inspire my mate,
Yet, though we perish, BLESS THIS CHURCH and STATE.
This sarcastic exultation of triumphant loyalty, is printed from an old
black-letter copy in the Pepys collection, corrected by two others, one
of which is preserved in _A choice collection of_ 120 _loyal songs,
&c._ 1684, 12mo.--To the tune of _Old Simon the king_.
the best of the numerous songs that were set to the favourite tune
of _Old Simon the King_, the full burden of which is--
"Says old Sir Symon the King,
Says old Sir Symon the King,
With his threadbare clothes
And his malmsey nose
Rebellion hath broken up house,
And hath left me old lumber to sell;
Come hither, and take your choice,
I'll promise to use you well:
Will you buy the old speaker's chair?                              5
Which was warm and easie to sit in,
And oft hath been clean'd I declare,
When as it was fouler than fitting.
Says old Simon the king, &c.
Will you buy any bacon-flitches,                                  10
The fattest, that ever were spent?
They're the sides of the old committees,
Fed up in the long parliament.
Here's a pair of bellows, and tongs,
And for a small matter I'll sell ye 'um;                        15
They are made of the presbyters lungs,
To blow up the coals of rebellion.
Says old Simon, &c.
I had thought to have given them once
To some black-smith for his forge;                              20
But now I have considered on't,
They are consecrate to the church:
So I'll give them unto some quire,
They will make the big organs roar,
And the little pipes to squeeke higher,                           25
Than ever they could before.
Says old Simon, &c.
Here's a couple of stools for sale,
One's square, and t'other is round;
Betwixt them both the tail                                        30
Of the RUMP fell down to the ground.
Will you buy the states council-table,
Which was made of the good wain Scot?
The frame was a tottering Babel
To uphold the Independent plot,                                 35
Says old Simon, &c.
Here's the beesom of Reformation,
Which should have made clean the floor,
But it swept the wealth out of the nation,
And left us dirt good store.                                    40
Will you buy the states spinning-wheel,
Which spun for the ropers trade?
But better it had stood still,
For now it has spun a fair thread.
Says old Simon, &c.                                       45
Here's a glyster-pipe well try'd,
And has been safely apply'd,
To cure the colds of the rump.
Here's a lump of Pilgrims-Salve,                                  50
Which once was a justice of peace,
Who Noll and the Devil did serve;
But now it is come to this.
Says old Simon, &c.
Here's a roll of the states tobacco,                              55
If any good fellow will take it;
No Virginia had e'er such a smack-o,
And I'll tell you how they did make it:
'Tis th' Engagement, and Covenant cookt
Up with the Abjuration oath;                                    60
And many of them, that have took't,
Complain it was foul in the mouth.
Says old Simon, &c.
Yet the ashes may happily serve
To cure the scab of the nation,                                 65
Whene'er 't has an itch to swerve
To Rebellion by innovation.
A Lanthorn here is to be bought,
The like was scarce ever gotten,
For many plots it has found out                                   70
Before they ever were thought on.
Says old Simon, &c.
Will you buy the RUMP'S great saddle,
With which it jocky'd the nation?
And here is the bitt, and the bridle,                             75
And curb of Dissimulation:
And here's the trunk-hose of the RUMP,
And their fair dissembling cloak,
And a Presbyterian jump,
With an Independent smock.                                      80
Says old Simon, &c.
Will you buy a Conscience oft turn'd,
Which serv'd the high-court of justice,
And stretch'd until England it mourn'd:
But Hell will buy that if the worst is.                         85
Wherein is the fat of the Rumpers,
With which old Noll's horns she did rub,
When he was got drunk with false bumpers.
Says old Simon, &c.                                       90
Here's the purse of the public faith;
Here's the model of the Sequestration,
When the old wives upon their good troth,
Here's Dick Cromwell's Protectorship,                             95
And here are Lambert's commissions,
And here is Hugh Peters his scrip
Cramm'd with the tumultuous Petitions
Says old Simon, &c.
And here are his dray, and his slings;
With diverse other odd things:
And what is the price doth belong
To all these matters before ye?                                105
I'll sell them all for an old song,
And so I do end my story.
Says old Simon, &c.
assisted Cromwell in turning out the long parliament, April 20, 1653.
Royalists, though her name was Elizabeth. She was taxed with exchanging
the kitchen-stuff for the candles used in the Protector's houshold, &c.
See _Gent. Mag._ for March, 1788, p. 242.
brewing trade at Huntingdon. Col. Hewson is said to have been
originally a cobler.
Given (with some corrections) from a MS. copy, and collated with two
printed ones in Roman character in the Pepys collection.
to Mr. Chappell is the one printed by Ritson in his _Ancient Songs_
(vol. ii. ed. 1829, p. 54), beginning--
"Yonder comes a courteous knight,"
with the burden, _Then she sang Downe a downe, hey downe derry_.
It is from _Deuteromelia, or the second part of Musicks melodie
or melodious Musicke_, London, 1609. Others are in _Pills to
purge Melancholy_ (iii. 1707, or v. 1719), and in _A Complete
Collection of old and new English and Scotch Songs_, 8vo., 1735.
The copy in the Roxburghe collection is entitled _The Politick
Maid_, beginning "There was a knight was wine dronke." Ritson says,
There was a knight was drunk with wine,
A riding along the way, sir;
And there he met with a lady fine,
Among the cocks of hay, sir.
Shall you and I, O lady faire,                                     5
Among the grass lye down-a:
And I will have a special care
Of rumpling of your gowne-a.
Upon the grass there is a dewe,
Will spoil my damask gowne, sir:                                10
My gowne, and kirtle they are newe,
And cost me many a crowne, sir.
I have a cloak of scarlet red,
Upon the ground I'll throwe it;
Then, lady faire, come lay thy head;                              15
We'll play, and none shall knowe it.
O yonder stands my steed so free
Among the cocks of hay, sir;
He'll take my steed away, sir.                                  20
Upon my finger I have a ring,
Is made of finest gold-a;
And, lady, it thy steed shall bring
Out of the pinner's fold-a.
O go with me to my father's hall;                                 25
Fair chambers there are three, sir:
And you shall have the best of all,
And I'll your chamberlaine bee, sir.
He mounted himself on his steed so tall,
And her on her dapple gray, sir:                                30
And there they rode to her father's hall,
Fast pricking along the way, sir.
To her father's hall they arrived strait;
'Twas moated round about-a;
She slipped herself within the gate,                              35
And lockt the knight without-a.
Here is a silver penny to spend,
And take it for your pain, sir;
And two of my father's men I'll send
To wait on you back again, sir.                                 40
He from his scabbard drew his brand,
And wiped it upon his sleeve-a:
And cursed, he said, be every man,
That will a maid believe-a!
She drew a bodkin from her haire,                                 45
And whip'd it upon her gown-a;
And curs'd be every maiden faire,
That will with men lye down-a!
A herb there is, that lowly grows,
And some do call it rue, sir:                                   50
The smallest dunghill cock that crows,
Would make a capon of you, sir.
A flower there is, that shineth bright,
Some call it mary gold-a;
He that wold not when he might,                                   55
He shall not when he wold-a.
The knight was riding another day,
With cloak and hat and feather:
He met again with that lady gay,
Who was angling in the river.                                   60
Now, lady faire, I've met with you,
You shall no more escape me;
Remember, how not long agoe
You falsely did intrap me.
The lady blushed scarlet red,                                     65
And trembled at the stranger:
How shall I guard my maidenhead
From this approaching danger?
He from his saddle down did light,
In all his riche attyer;                                        70
And cryed, As I am a noble knight,
I do thy charms admyer.
He took the lady by the hand,
Who seemingly consented;
And would no more disputing stand:                                75
She had a plot invented.
Looke yonder, good sir knight, I pray,
Methinks I now discover
A riding upon his dapple gray,
My former constant lover.                                       80
On tip-toe peering stood the knight,
Fast by the rivers brink-a;
The lady pusht with all her might:
Sir knight, now swim or sink-a.
O'er head and ears he plunged in,                                 85
The bottom faire he sounded;
Then rising up, he cried amain,
Help, helpe, or else I'm drownded!
Now, fare-you-well, sir knight, adieu!
You see what comes of fooling:                                  90
That is the fittest place for you;
Your courage wanted cooling.
Ere many days, in her fathers park,
Just at the close of eve-a,
Again she met with her angry sparke;                              95
Which made this lady grieve-a.
False lady, here thou'rt in my powre,
And no one now can hear thee:
And thou shalt sorely rue the hour,
That e'er thou dar'dst to jeer me.                               100
I pray, sir knight, be not so warm
With a young silly maid-a:
I vow and swear I thought no harm,
'Twas a gentle jest I playd-a.
A gentle jest, in soothe! he cry'd,                              105
To tumble me in and leave me:
What if I had in the river dy'd?----
That fetch will not deceive me.
Once more I'll pardon thee this day,
Tho' injur'd out of measure;                                   110
But then prepare without delay
To yield thee to my pleasure.
Well then, if I must grant your suit,
Yet think of your boots and spurs, sir
Let me pull off both spur and boot,                              115
Or else you cannot stir, sir.
He set him down upon the grass,
And begg'd her kind assistance:
Now, smiling thought this lovely lass,
I'll make you keep your distance.                              120
Then pulling off his boots half-way;
Sir knight, now I'm your betters:
You shall not make of me your prey;
Sit there like a knave in fetters.
The knight when she had served soe,                              125
He fretted, fum'd, and grumbled:
For he could neither stand nor goe,
But like a cripple tumbled.
Farewell, sir knight, the clock strikes ten,
Yet do not move nor stir, sir:                                 130
I'll send you my father's serving men,
To pull off your boots and spurs, sir.
This merry jest you must excuse,
You are but a stingless nettle:
You'd never have stood for boots or shoes,                       135
Had you been a man of mettle.
All night in grievous rage he lay,
Rolling upon the plain-a;
Next morning a shepherd past that way,
Who set him right again-a.                                     140
Then mounting upon his steed so tall,
By hill and dale he swore-a:
I'll ride at once to her father's hall;
She shall escape no more-a.
I'll take her father by the beard,                               145
I'll challenge all her kindred;
Each dastard soul shall stand affeard;
My wrath shall no more be hindred,
He rode unto her father's house,
Which every side was moated:                                   150
The lady heard his furious vows,
And all his vengeance noted.
Thought shee, sir knight, to quench your rage,
Once more I will endeavour:
This water shall your fury 'swage,                               155
Or else it shall burn for ever.
Then faining penitence and feare,
She did invite a parley:
Sir knight, if you'll forgive me heare,
Henceforth I'll love you dearly.                               160
My father he is now from home,
And I am all alone, sir:
Therefore a-cross the water come;
And I am all your own, sir.
False maid, thou canst no more deceive;                          165
I scorn the treacherous bait-a:
If thou would'st have me thee believe,
Now open me the gate-a.
The bridge is drawn, the gate is barr'd,
My father he has the keys, sir.                                170
But I have for my love prepar'd
A shorter way and easier.
Over the moate I've laid a plank
Full seventeen feet in measure:
Then step a-cross to the other bank,                             175
And there we'll take our pleasure.
These words she had no sooner spoke,
But strait he came tripping over:
The plank was saw'd, it snapping broke;
And sous'd the unhappy lover.                                  180
From Sir John Suckling's _Poems_. This sprightly knight was born in
Song IX. of this Book.
is sung by Orsames, a young lord, who says--"It is a little foolish
counsel I gave a friend of mine four or five years ago when he was
falling into a consumption."
Dr. Rimbault (_Musical Illustrations_, p. 29) writes, "The original
air is here given from a MS. volume of old songs with the music,
_temp._ Charles II. in the collection of the Editor. It was
originally in the Library at Staunton Harold, Leicestershire, the
seat of Earl Ferrers. This beautiful lyric was sung by Mrs. Cross
in the _Mock Astrologer_, to an air composed by Lewis Ramondon.
It was afterwards reset by Dr. Arne."
The date of the poet's birth given above is incorrect. Suckling was
baptized on the tenth of February, 1608-9, and his mother died in
him of an apothecary at Paris. The date of his death is not known,
but it probably took place in 1641, and he certainly was dead
Why so pale and wan, fond lover?
Prethee, why so pale?
Will, when looking well can't move her,
Looking ill prevail?
Prethee, why so pale?                                            5
Why so dull and mute, young sinner?
Prethee why so mute?
Will, when speaking well can't win her,
Saying nothing doe't?
Prethee why so mute?                                            10
Quit, quit for shame; this will not move,
This cannot take her;
If of herself she will not love,
Nothing can make her.
The devil take her!                                             15
It is worth attention, that the English have more songs and ballads on
the subject of madness, than any of their neighbours. Whether there be
any truth in the insinuation, that we are more liable to this calamity
than other nations, or that our native gloominess hath peculiarly
recommended subjects of this cast to our writers; we certainly do not
find the same in the printed collections of French, Italian Songs, &c.
Out of a much larger quantity, we have selected half a dozen _mad
songs_ for these volumes. The three first are originals in their
respective kinds; the merit of the three last is chiefly that of
imitation. They were written at considerable intervals of time; but we
have here grouped them together, that the reader may the better examine
their comparative merits. He may consider them as so many trials of
skill in a very peculiar subject, as the contest of so many rivals to
shoot in the bow of Ulysses. The two first were probably written about
the beginning of the last century; the third about the middle of it;
the fourth and sixth towards the end; and the fifth within this present
century.
This is given from the Editor's folio MS. compared with two or three
old printed copies.--With regard to the author of this old rhapsody,
in Walton's _Compleat Angler_, cap. 3, is a song in praise of angling,
which the author says was made at his request "by Mr. _William Basse_,
one that has made the choice songs of the _Hunter in his career_, and
of _Tom of Bedlam_, and many others of note," p. 84. See Sir _John
Hawkins's_ curious Edition, 8vo. of that excellent old book.
shammed. These "mad rascals" were so numerous a class that they
obtained the distinctive names of Bedlam beggars, and Abraham
men. Dekker describes their tricks in his _Bellman of London_,
and coming near any body, cries out, 'Poor Tom is a cold;'" the
very expression used by Edgar when he appears in the disguise of
a madman (_King Lear_). Mr. Chappell observes that there is great
uncertainty as to the authorship, for there are so many Tom of
Bedlam songs that it is impossible to determine from the passage in
the _Complete Angler_ to which of them Walton refers. It is also
doubtful to whom we are indebted for the tune. Mr. Chappell thinks
that probably it was by Henry Lawes's master, John Cooper, called
Cuperario after his visit to Italy. It has been attributed, without
Forth from my sad and darksome cell,
Mad Tom is come into the world againe
Harke, howe the angrye Fureys houle!
To see poore naked Tom of Bedlam madd.
To seeke my straggling senses,                                  10
In vaine with cryes
Cold and comfortless I lye:
Helpe, oh helpe! or else I dye!                                 20
Harke! I heare Apollo's teame,
The carman 'gins to whistle;
Chast Diana bends her bowe,
The boare begins to bristle.
Come, Vulcan, with tools and with tackles,                        25
Bid Charles make ready his waine
Last night I heard the dog-star bark;
Mars met Venus in the darke;                                      30
But Vulcan's temples had the gout,
Mercurye the nimble post of heaven,
Bestryd a strong-beere barrell.                                 40
To mee he dranke,
I did him thanke,
But I could get no cyder;
He dranke whole butts
Till he burst his gutts,                                        45
But mine were ne'er the wyder.
Poore naked Tom is very drye:
A little drinke for charitye!
Harke, I hear Acteon's horne!
The huntsmen whoop and hallowe:                                 50
Ringwood, Royster, Bowman, Jowler,
All the chase do followe.
The man in the moone drinkes clarret,
Eates powder'd beef, turnip, and carret,
But a cup of old Malaga sack                                      55
Will fire the bushe at his backe.
Was written about the beginning of the seventeenth century by the witty
bishop Corbet, and is printed from the 3d edition of his Poems, 12mo.
other songs entitled _Tom of Bedlam_. It was also printed in the
_Rump Songs_, 1662, but not in the edition of 1660.
The copy in the folio MS. (ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. iii. p.
MS., where it occurs as stanza 8.
Richard Corbet, successively Bishop of Oxford and Norwich, was born
at Ewell in Surrey in 1582. He died in 1635. He was a humorous man,
and many pleasant stories are told of him, but Aubrey describes his
appearance as "grave and venerable."
Am I mad, O noble Festus,
When zeal and godly knowledge
Have put me in hope
To deal with the pope,
As well as the best in the college?                                5
Boldly I preach, hate a cross, hate a surplice,
Mitres, copes, and rochets;
Come hear me pray nine times a day,
And fill your heads with crochets.
I had my education,
Where my friends surmise
I dazel'd my eyes
With the sight of revelation.
Boldly I preach, &c.
They bound me like a bedlam,                                      15
They lash'd my four poor quarters;
Whilst this I endure,
Faith makes me sure
To be one of Foxes martyrs.
Boldly I preach, &c.
These injuries I suffer                                           20
Through antichrist's perswasion:
Take off this chain,
Neither Rome nor Spain
Can resist my strong invasion.
Boldly I preach, &c.
Of the beast's ten horns (God bless us!)                          25
I have knock'd off three already;
If they let me alone
I'll leave him none:
But they say I am too heady.
Boldly I preach, &c.
When I sack'd the seven-hill'd city,                              30
I met the great red dragon;
I kept him aloof
With the armour of proof,
Though here I have never a rag on.
Boldly I preach, &c.
With a fiery sword and target,                                    35
There fought I with this monster:
But the sons of pride
My zeal deride,
And all my deeds misconster.
Boldly I preach, &c.
I un-hors'd the Whore of Babel,                                   40
With the lance of Inspiration;
I made her slink,
And spill the drink
In her cup of abomination.
Boldly I preach, &c.
I have seen two in a vision                                       45
I have been in despair
Five times in a year,
Boldly I preach, &c.
The black line of damnation;
Those crooked veins
So stuck in my brains,
That I fear'd my reprobation.
Boldly I preach, &c.
In the holy tongue of Canaan                                      55
I plac'd my chiefest pleasure:
Till I prick'd my foot
With an Hebrew root,
That I bled beyond all measure.
Boldly I preach, &c.
And all the high commission;
I gave him no grace,
But told him to his face,
That he favour'd superstition.
Boldly I preach, hate a cross, hate a surplice,
Mitres, copes, and rochets:                                 66
Come hear me pray nine times a day,
And fill your heads with crotchets.
founder of Emanuel, in his _History of the University of Cambridge_.
"Coming to court after he had founded his college, the queen told him,
'Sir Walter, I hear you have erected a Puritan foundation.' 'No madam,'
saith he, 'far be it from me to countenance anything contrary to your
established laws; but I have set an acorn, which, when it becomes an
or, if the date of this song would permit, one might suppose it aimed
at one _Coppe_, a strange enthusiast, whose life may be seen in Wood's
_Athen._ vol. ii. p. 501. He was author of a book, intitled, _The Fiery
Flying Roll_: and afterwards published a Recantation, part of whose
title is, _The Fiery Flying Roll's Wings clipt_, &c.
intitled, _A sweet Comfort for an afflicted Conscience_.
a singularly ardent preacher, and Brook, in his _Lives of the
Puritans_, says, that "in addition to his public ministerial labours
he had a remarkable talent for comforting afflicted consciences." His
half sheet folded, containing, _A survey, or table, declaring the
order of the causes of salvation and damnation, &c._ the pedigree of
damnation being distinguished by a broad black zig-zag line.
pronounce the word _damn_ with so peculiar an emphasis "that it left a
doleful echo in the eares a long time after." His works were frequently
reprinted, and, according to Fuller, were translated into Latin,
Is given from an old printed copy in the British Museum, compared with
another in the Pepys collection; both in black letter.
Douce, and Roxburghe collections, as well as in the Pepys. The tune
Grim king of the ghosts, make haste,
And bring hither all your train;
See how the pale moon does waste,
And just now is in the wane.
Come, you night-hags, with all your charms,                        5
And revelling witches away,
And hug me close in your arms;
To you my respects I'll pay.
I'll court you, and think you fair,
Since love does distract my brain:                              10
I'll go, I'll wed the night-mare,
And kiss her, and kiss her again:
But if she prove peevish and proud,
Then, a pise on her love! let her go;
I'll seek me a winding shroud,                                    15
And down to the shades below.
A lunacy sad I endure,
Since reason departs away;
I call to those hags for a cure
As knowing not what I say.                                      20
The beauty, whom I do adore,
Now slights me with scorn and disdain;
I never shall see her more;
Ah! how shall I bear my pain!
I ramble, and range about                                         25
To find out my charming saint;
While she at my grief does flout,
And smiles at my loud complaint.
Distraction I see is my doom,
Of this I am now too sure;                                      30
A rival is got in my room,
While torments I do endure.
Strange fancies do fill my head,
While wandering in despair,
I am to the desarts lead,                                         35
Expecting to find her there.
Methinks in a spangled cloud
I see her enthroned on high;
Then to her I crie aloud,
And labour to reach the sky.                                    40
When thus I have raved awhile,
And wearyed myself in vain,
I lye on the barren soil,
And bitterly do complain.
Till slumber hath quieted me,                                     45
In sorrow I sigh and weep;
The clouds are my canopy
To cover me while I sleep.
I dream that my charming fair
Is then in my rival's bed,                                      50
Whose tresses of golden hair
Are on the fair pillow bespread.
Then this doth my passion inflame
I start, and no longer can lie:
Ah! Sylvia, art thou not to blame                                 55
To ruin a lover? I cry.
Grim king of the ghosts, be true,
And hurry me hence away,
My languishing life to you
A tribute I freely pay.                                         60
To the elysian shades I post
In hopes to be freed from care.
Where many a bleeding ghost
Is hovering in the air.
Was originally sung in one of _Tom D'urfey's_ comedies of _Don Quixote_
in 1694 and 1696; and probably composed by himself. In the several
stanzas, the author represents his pretty Mad-woman as 1. sullenly mad:
stark mad. Both this, and Num. XXII. are printed from D'urfey's _Pills
to purge Melancholy_, 1719, vol. i.
From rosie bowers, where sleeps the god of love,
Hither ye little wanton cupids fly;
Teach me in soft melodious strains to move
With tender passion my heart's darling joy:
Ah! let the soul of musick tune my voice,                          5
To win dear Strephon, who my soul enjoys.
Or, if more influencing
Is to be brisk and airy,
With a step and a bound,
With a frisk from the ground,                                 10
I'll trip like any fairy.
As once on Ida dancing
Were three celestial bodies:
With an air, and a face,
And a shape, and a grace,                                     15
I'll charm, like beauty's goddess.
Ah! 'tis in vain! 'tis all, 'tis all in vain!
Death and despair must end the fatal pain:
Cold, cold despair, disguis'd like snow and rain,
Falls on my breast; bleak winds in tempests blow;
My veins all shiver, and my fingers glow:                       21
My pulse beats a dead march for lost repose,
And to a solid lump of ice my poor fond heart is froze.
Or say, ye powers, my peace to crown,
Shall I thaw myself, and drown                                    25
Among the foaming billows?
Increasing all with tears I shed,
On beds of ooze, and crystal pillows,
Lay down, lay down my lovesick head?
No, no, I'll strait run mad, mad, mad,                            30
That soon my heart will warm;
When once the sense is fled, is fled,
Love has no power to charm.
Wild thro' the woods I'll fly, I'll fly,
Robes, locks----shall thus----be tore!                          35
A thousand, thousand times I'll dye
Ere thus, thus, in vain,--ere thus in vain adore.
Was written by _Henry Carey_, a celebrated composer of music at the
beginning of this century, and author of several little Theatrical
Entertainments, which the reader may find enumerated in the _Companion
to the Play-house_, &c. The sprightliness of this songster's fancy
could not preserve him from a very melancholy catastrophe, which was
effected by his own hand. In his _Poems_, 4to. Lond. 1729, may be seen
another Mad-Song of this author, beginning thus:
"Gods! I can never this endure,
Death alone must be my cure," &c.
I go to the Elysian shade,
Where sorrow ne'er shall wound me;
Where nothing shall my rest invade,
But joy shall still surround me.
I fly from Celia's cold disdain,                                 5
From her disdain I fly;
She is the cause of all my pain,
For her alone I die.
Her eyes are brighter than the mid-day sun,
When he but half his radiant course has run,                      10
When his meridian glories gaily shine,
And gild all nature with a warmth divine.
See yonder river's flowing tide,
Which now so full appears;
Those streams, that do so swiftly glide,                        15
Are nothing but my tears.
There I have wept till I could weep no more,
And curst mine eyes, when they have wept their store:
Then, like the clouds, that rob the azure main,
I've drain'd the flood to weep it back again.                     20
Pity my pains,
Ye gentle swains!
Cover me with ice and snow,
I scorch, I burn, I flame, I glow!
Furies, tear me,                                                25
Quickly bear me
To the dismal shades below!
Where yelling, and howling
And grumbling, and growling
Strike the ear with horrid woe.                                   30
Hissing snakes,
Fiery lakes
Would be a pleasure, and a cure:
Not all the hells,
Where Pluto dwells,                                             35
Can give such pain as I endure.
To some peaceful plain convey me,
On a mossey carpet lay me,
Fan me with ambrosial breeze,
Let me die, and so have ease!                                     40
This, like Num. XX., was originally sung in one of _D'urfey's_ comedies
of _Don Quixote_, (first acted about the year 1694) and was probably
composed by that popular songster, who died Feb. 26, 1723.
This is printed in the _Hive, a Collection of Songs_, 4 vols. 1721,
into these Volumes.
I burn, my brain consumes to ashes!
Each eye-ball too like lightning flashes!
Within my breast there glows a solid fire,
Which in a thousand ages can't expire!
Blow, blow, the winds' great ruler!                            5
Bring the Po, and the Ganges hither,
'Tis sultry weather,
Pour them all on my soul,
It will hiss like a coal,
But be never the cooler.                                      10
'Twas pride hot as hell,
That first made me rebell,
From love's awful throne a curst angel I fell
And mourn now my fate,
Which myself did create:                                      15
Fool, fool, that consider'd not when I was well!
Adieu! ye vain transporting joys!
Off ye vain fantastic toys!
That dress this face--this body--to allure!
Bring me daggers, poison, fire!                               20
Since scorn is turn'd into desire.
All hell feels not the rage, which I, poor I, endure.
The following rhymes, slight and insignificant as they may now
seem, had once a more powerful effect than either the Philippics of
Demosthenes, or Cicero; and contributed not a little towards the great
revolution in 1688. Let us hear a contemporary writer.
"A foolish ballad was made at that time, treating the Papists, and
chiefly the Irish, in a very ridiculous manner, which had a burden said
to be Irish words, _Lero, lero, liliburlero_, that made an impression
on the (king's) army, that cannot be imagined by those that saw it not.
The whole army, and at last the people, both in city and country, were
singing it perpetually. And perhaps never had so slight a thing so
great an effect."--_Burnet._
It was written, or at least republished, on the earl of Tyrconnel's
going a second time to Ireland in October, 1688. Perhaps it is
unnecessary to mention, that General Richard Talbot, newly created earl
of Tyrconnel, had been nominated by K. James II. to the lieutenancy
of Ireland in 1686, on account of his being a furious papist, who had
recommended himself to his bigotted master by his arbitrary treatment
of the protestants in the preceding year, when only lieutenant general,
and whose subsequent conduct fully justified his expectations and their
fears. The violences of his administration may be seen in any of the
histories of those times: particularly in bishop King's _State of the
Protestants in Ireland_, 1691, 4to.
This song is attributed to Lord _Wharton_ in a small pamphlet,
intitled, _A true relation of the several facts and circumstances
of the intended riot and tumult on Q. Elizabeth's birth-day, &c._
Ireland,) who has so often boasted himself upon his talent for mischief
invention, lying, and for making a certain _Lilliburlero Song_; with
which, if you will believe himself, he sung a deluded Prince out of
Three Kingdoms."
_Lilliburlero_ and _Bullen-a-lah_ are said to have been the words of
distinction used among the Irish Papists in their massacre of the
Protestants in 1641.
than to this poor specimen of verse, which caught the fancy of the
people and drove James from his throne. Macaulay wrote of it as
follows:--"From one end of England to the other all classes were
constantly singing this idle rhyme. It was especially the delight
of the English army. More than seventy years after the Revolution,
Sterne delineated with exquisite skill a veteran who had fought
at the Boyne and at Namur. One of the characteristics of the good
old soldier is his trick of whistling _Lilliburlero_." The air is
attributed to Purcell, but it is supposed that he only arranged
an earlier tune. Hume thought that the popularity of the song was
rather due to the composer of the air than to the author of the
words.
Mr. Markland, in a note to Boswell's _Life of Johnson_, says, that
"according to Lord Dartmouth there was a particular expression in
it, which the king remembered that he had made use of to the Earl
of Dorset, from whence it was concluded that he was the author."
Upon this Mr. Chappell remarks, 1. that "the Earl of Dorset laid
no claim to it, and it is scarcely to be believed that the author
of _To all you ladies now on land_ could have penned such thorough
doggrel." 2. That "the ballad contains no expression that the King
would have used, which might not equally have been employed by any
was Thomas Marquis of Wharton, father of the mad Duke Philip of
Wharton. He discerned the indications of the political horizon and
espoused the winning side. He was well rewarded for his wisdom. Mr.
S. Redmond (_Notes and Queries_, third series, viii. 13) writes
that he has often heard the girls in the south and south-east of
Ireland, while engaged in binding the corn into sheaves after the
reapers, sing the following chorus, which always had reference to
one of the gang who was not so quick at her work as the others, and
who consequently was left behind:
"Lully by lero,
Lully by lero,
Lully by lero,
Ho! broder Teague, dost hear de decree?
Lilli burlero, bullen a-la.
Dat we shall have a new deputie,
Lilli burlero burlen a-la.
Lero lero, lilli burlero, lero lero, bullen a-la,                  5
Lero lero, lilli burlero, lero lero, bullen a-la.
Lilli, &c.
And he will cut de Englishmen's troate.
Lilli, &c.                                                    10
Dough by my shoul de English do praat,
Lilli, &c.
De law's on dare side, and Creish knows what.
Lilli, &c.
But if dispence do come from de pope,                             15
Lilli, &c.
We'll hang Magna Charta, and dem in a rope.
Lilli, &c.
For de good Talbot is made a lord,
Lilli, &c.                                                    20
And with brave lads is coming aboard:
Lilli, &c.
Who all in France have taken a sware,
Lilli, &c.
Dat dey will have no protestant heir.                             25
Lilli, &c.
Ara! but why does he stay behind?
Lilli, &c.
Ho! by my shoul 'tis a protestant wind.
Lilli, &c.                                                    30
But see de Tyrconnel is now come ashore,
Lilli, &c.
And we shall have commissions gillore.
Lilli, &c.
And he dat will not go to de mass,                                35
Lilli, &c.
Shall be turn out, and look like an ass.
Lilli, &c.
Now, now de hereticks all go down,
Lilli, &c.                                                    40
By Chrish and shaint Patrick, de nation's our own.
Lilli, &c.
Lilli, &c.
"Ireland shall be rul'd by an ass, and a dog."                    45
Lilli, &c.
And now dis prophesy is come to pass,
Lilli, &c.
Lilli, &c.                                                    50
Was written by William Hamilton, of Bangour, Esq; who died March 25,
published at Edinburgh, 1760, 12mo. This song was written in imitation
of an old Scottish ballad on a similar subject, with the same burden to
each stanza.
These verses of Hamilton's are copied from the old ballad--_The_
_Dowie Dens_ (melancholy downs) _of Yarrow_, a collated version
of which was first printed by Scott in his _Minstrelsy of the
Scottish Border_. Scott was of opinion that with many readers
the greatest recommendation of the old ballad will be that it
suggested to Hamilton his modern one. We may say that the greatest
recommendation of Hamilton's poem to us is the fact that it
inspired Wordsworth to write his three lovely little poems, _Yarrow
Unvisited_, _Visited_, and _Revisited_.
There are two old ballads which have been much mixed up by
reciters, viz. _The Dowie Dens_ and _Willie's drowned in Yarrow_.
The Rev. John Logan's _Braes of Yarrow_ is founded on the latter.
William Hamilton of Bangour was born in 1704 and died at Lyons in
interred in Holyrood Abbey. He was a Jacobite, and after the battle
of Culloden was forced to skulk about the Highlands in disguise
until he was able to escape to France. He returned to Scotland
Busk ye, busk ye, my bonny bonny bride,
_B._ Where gat ye that bonny bonny bride?                          5
Where gat ye that winsome marrow?
_A._ I gat her where I dare na weil be seen,
Weep not, weep not, my bonny bonny bride,
Weep not, weep not, my winsome marrow;                          10
Nor let thy heart lament to leive
Puing the birks on the Braes of Yarrow.
_B._ Why does she weep, thy bonny bonny bride?
Why does she weep thy winsome marrow?
And why dare ye nae mair weil be seen                             15
Puing the birks on the Braes of Yarrow?
_A._ Lang maun she weep, lang maun she, maun she weep,
Lang maun she weep with dule and sorrow;
And lang maun I nae mair weil be seen
Puing the birks on the Braes of Yarrow.                         20
Her luver dear, the cause of sorrow;
And I hae slain the comliest swain
That eir pu'd birks on the Braes of Yarrow.
Why rins thy stream, O Yarrow, Yarrow, reid?                      25
Why on thy braes heard the voice of sorrow?
And why yon melancholious weids
Hung on the bonny birks of Yarrow?
What's yonder floats on the rueful rueful flude?
What's yonder floats? O dule and sorrow!                        30
O 'tis he the comely swain I slew
Upon the duleful Braes of Yarrow.
Wash, O wash his wounds, his wounds in tears,
His wounds in tears with dule and sorrow;
And wrap his limbs in mourning weids,                             35
And lay him on the Braes of Yarrow.
Then build, then build, ye sisters, sisters sad,
Ye sisters sad, his tomb with sorrow;
And weep around in waeful wise
His hapless fate on the Braes of Yarrow.                        40
Curse ye, curse ye, his useless, useless shield,
My arm that wrought the deed of sorrow,
The fatal spear that pierc'd his breast,
His comely breast on the Braes of Yarrow.
Did I not warn thee, not to, not to luve?                         45
And warn from fight? but to my sorrow
Too rashly bauld a stronger arm
Thou mett'st, and fell'st on the Braes of Yarrow.
Sweet smells the birk, green grows, green grows the grass,
Fair hangs the apple frae the rock,
Sweet the wave of Yarrow flowan.
Flows Yarrow sweet? as sweet, as sweet flows Tweed,
As green its grass, its gowan as yellow,
As sweet smells on its braes the birk,                            55
The apple frae its rock as mellow.
Fair was thy luve, fair fair indeed thy luve,
In flow'ry bands thou didst him fetter;
Tho' he was fair, and weil beluv'd again
Than me he never luv'd thee better.                             60
Busk ye, then busk, my bonny bonny bride,
Busk ye, busk ye, my winsome marrow,
Busk ye, and luve me on the banks of Tweed,
And think nae mair on the Braes of Yarrow.
_C._ How can I busk a bonny bonny bride?                          65
How can I busk a winsome marrow?
How luve him upon the banks of Tweed,
That slew my luve on the Braes of Yarrow?
O Yarrow fields, may never never rain,
Nor dew thy tender blossoms cover,                              70
For there was basely slain my luve,
My luve, as he had not been a lover.
The boy put on his robes, his robes of green,
His purple vest, 'twas my awn sewing:
Ah! wretched me! I little, little kenn'd                          75
He was in these to meet his ruin.
The boy took out his milk-white, milk-white steed,
Unheedful of my dule and sorrow:
He lay a corps on the Braes of Yarrow.                          80
Much I rejoyc'd that waeful waeful day;
I sang, my voice the woods returning:
But lang ere night the spear was flown,
That slew my luve, and left me mourning.
What can my barbarous barbarous father do,                        85
But with his cruel rage pursue me?
My luver's blood is on thy spear,
How canst thou, barbarous man, then wooe me?
My happy sisters may be, may be proud
With cruel, and ungentle scoffin',                              90
May bid me seek on Yarrow's Braes
My luver nailed in his coffin.
My brother Douglas may upbraid, upbraid,
And strive with threatning words to muve me:
My luver's blood is on thy spear,                                 95
How canst thou ever bid me luve thee?
Yes, yes, prepare the bed, the bed of luve,
With bridal sheets my body cover,
Unbar, ye bridal maids, the door,
Let in the expected husband lover.                             100
But who the expected husband husband is?
His hands, methinks, are bath'd in slaughter:
Ah me! what ghastly spectre's yon
Comes in his pale shroud, bleeding after?
Pale as he is, here lay him, lay him down,                       105
O lay his cold head on my pillow;
Take aff, take aff these bridal weids,
And crown my careful head with willow.
Pale tho' thou art, yet best, yet best beluv'd,
O could my warmth to life restore thee!                        110
Yet lye all night between my breists,
No youth lay ever there before thee.
Pale, pale indeed, O luvely luvely youth,
Forgive, forgive, so foul a slaughter,
And lye all night between my breists,                            115
No youth shall ever lye there after.
_A._ Return, return, O mournful, mournful bride,
Return and dry thy useless sorrow:
Thy luver heeds none of thy sighs,
He lyes a corps in the Braes of Yarrow.                        120
on the taking of Porto Bello from the Spaniards by Admiral Vernon,
Nov. 22, 1739.--The case of Hosier, which is here so pathetically
represented, was briefly this. In April, 1726, that commander was
sent with a strong fleet into the Spanish West-Indies, to block up
the galleons in the ports of that country, or should they presume to
come out, to seize and carry them into England: he accordingly arrived
at the Bastimentos near Porto Bello, but being employed rather to
overawe than to attack the Spaniards, with whom it was probably not our
interest to go to war, he continued long inactive on that station, to
his own great regret. He afterwards removed to Carthagena, and remained
cruizing in these seas, till far the greater part of his men perished
deplorably by the diseases of that unhealthy climate. This brave man,
seeing his best officers and men thus daily swept away, his ships
exposed to inevitable destruction, and himself made the sport of the
enemy, is said to have died of a broken heart. Such is the account of
Smollett, compared with that of other less partial writers.
The following song is commonly accompanied with a Second Part, or
Answer, which being of inferior merit, and apparently written by
another hand, hath been rejected.
earliest copy of the tune to this ballad is contained in the
ballad opera of _Sylvia, or the Country Burial_, 1731. It may
also be found in Walsh's _British Musical Miscellany_, vol. iv.
and in other works of a similar description. The ballads of _Come
and listen to my ditty_ and _Cease, rude Boreas_, were sung to
this tune, which appears to have been always a favourite for 'sea
ditties.'"
In Hannah More's _Life_ (vol. i. p. 405) is the following
interesting note: "I was much amused with hearing old Leonidas
Glover sing his own fine ballad of _Hosier's Ghost_, which was very
affecting. He is past eighty." In the matter of the last item Mrs.
More was wrong. Richard Glover was born in 1712, and died on Nov.
As near Porto-Bello lying
On the gently swelling flood,
At midnight with streamers flying
Our triumphant navy rode;
There while Vernon sate all-glorious                               5
From the Spaniards' late defeat:
And his crews, with shouts victorious,
Drank success to England's fleet:
On a sudden shrilly sounding,
Hideous yells and shrieks were heard;                           10
Then each heart with fear confounding,
A sad troop of ghosts appear'd,
All in dreary hammocks shrouded,
Which for winding-sheets they wore,
And with looks by sorrow clouded                                  15
Frowning on that hostile shore.
On them gleam'd the moon's wan lustre,
When the shade of Hosier brave
His pale bands was seen to muster
Rising from their watry grave.                                  20
O'er the glimmering wave he hy'd him,
With three thousand ghosts beside him,
And in groans did Vernon hail.
Heed, oh heed our fatal story,                                    25
I am Hosier's injur'd ghost,
You, who now have purchas'd glory,
At this place where I was lost!
Tho' in Porto-Bello's ruin
You now triumph free from fears,                                30
When you think on our undoing,
You will mix your joy with tears.
See these mournful spectres sweeping
Ghastly o'er this hated wave,
Whose wan cheeks are stain'd with weeping;                        35
These were English captains brave.
Mark those numbers pale and horrid,
Those were once my sailors bold:
Lo, each hangs his drooping forehead,
While his dismal tale is told.                                  40
I, by twenty sail attended,
Did this Spanish town affright;
Nothing then its wealth defended
But my orders not to fight.
Oh! that in this rolling ocean                                    45
I had cast them with disdain,
And obey'd my heart's warm motion
To have quell'd the pride of Spain!
For resistance I could fear none,
But with twenty ships had done                                  50
What thou, brave and happy Vernon,
Hast atchiev'd with six alone.
Then the bastimentos never
Had our foul dishonour seen,
Nor the sea the sad receiver                                      55
Of this gallant train had been.
Thus, like thee, proud Spain dismaying,
And her galleons leading home,
Though condemn'd for disobeying,
I had met a traitor's doom,                                     60
To have fallen, my country crying
He has play'd an English part,
Had been better far than dying
Of a griev'd and broken heart.
Unrepining at thy glory,                                          65
Thy successful arms we hail;
But remember our sad story,
And let Hosier's wrongs prevail.
Sent in this foul clime to languish,
Think what thousands fell in vain,                              70
Wasted with disease and anguish,
Not in glorious battle slain.
Hence with all my train attending
From their oozy tombs below,
Thro' the hoary foam ascending,                                   75
Here I feed my constant woe:
Here the bastimentos viewing,
We recal our shameful doom,
And our plaintive cries renewing,
Wander thro' the midnight gloom.                                80
O'er these waves for ever mourning
Shall we roam depriv'd of rest,
If to Britain's shores returning
You neglect my just request;
After this proud foe subduing,                                    85
When your patriot friends you see,
Think on vengeance for my ruin,
And for England sham'd in me.
hath been also attributed to the late Lord Bath.
_James Dawson_ was one of the Manchester rebels, who was hanged, drawn,
and quartered, on Kennington-common, in the county of Surrey, July 30,
to have happened at his execution. It was written by the late _William
Shenstone_, Esq; soon after the event, and has been printed amongst
his posthumous works, 2 vols. 8vo. It is here given from a MS. which
contained some small variations from that printed copy.
Manchester regiment of Volunteers in the service of the young
Chevalier, who were executed on Kennington Common.
The following ballad is founded upon a narrative first published
in a periodical entitled _The Parrot_, Saturday, 2d August, 1746,
three days after the occurrence. In the _Whitehall Evening Post_,
Aug. 7, 1746, the same story is told with the addition, that "upon
enquiry every circumstance was literally true." Another ballad is
said to have been written upon Dawson's fate, and sung about the
streets. It is reprinted in the _European Magazine_, April, 1801,
p. 248, and begins as follows:
"Blow ye bleak winds around my head,
Come listen to my mournful tale,
Ye tender hearts, and lovers dear;
Nor will you scorn to heave a sigh,
Nor will you blush to shed a tear
And thou, dear Kitty, peerless maid,                               5
Do thou a pensive ear incline;
For thou canst weep at every woe,
And pity every plaint, but mine.
Young Dawson was a gallant youth,
A brighter never trod the plain;                                10
And well he lov'd one charming maid,
And dearly was he lov'd again.
One tender maid she lov'd him dear,
Of gentle blood the damsel came,
And faultless was her beauteous form,                             15
And spotless was her virgin fame.
But curse on party's hateful strife,
That led the faithful youth astray
The day the rebel clans appear'd:
O had he never seen that day!                                   20
Their colours and their sash he wore,
And in the fatal dress was found;
And now he must that death endure,
Which gives the brave the keenest wound.
How pale was then his true love's cheek,                          25
When Jemmy's sentence reach'd her ear!
For never yet did Alpine snows
So pale, nor yet so chill appear.
With faltering voice she weeping said,
Oh Dawson, monarch of my heart,                                 30
Think not thy death shall end our loves,
For thou and I will never part.
Yet might sweet mercy find a place,
And bring relief to Jemmy's woes,
O GEORGE, without a prayer for thee                               35
My orisons should never close.
The gracious prince that gives him life
Would crown a never-dying flame,
And every tender babe I bore
Should learn to lisp the giver's name.                          40
But though, dear youth, thou should'st be dragg'd
To yonder ignominious tree,
Thou shalt not want a faithful friend
To share thy bitter fate with thee.
O then her mourning coach was call'd,                             45
The sledge mov'd slowly on before;
Tho' borne in a triumphal car,
She had not lov'd her favourite more.
She followed him, prepar'd to view
The terrible behests of law;                                    50
And the last scene of Jemmy's woes
With calm and stedfast eye she saw.
Distorted was that blooming face,
Which she had fondly lov'd so long:
And stifled was that tuneful breath,                              55
Which in her praise had sweetly sung:
And sever'd was that beauteous neck,
Round which her arms had fondly clos'd:
And mangled was that beauteous breast,
On which her love-sick head repos'd:                            60
And ravish'd was that constant heart,
She did to every heart prefer;
For tho' it could his king forget,
'Twas true and loyal still to her.
Amid those unrelenting flames                                     65
She bore this constant heart to see;
But when 'twas moulder'd into dust,
Now, now, she cried, I'll follow thee.
My death, my death alone can show
The pure and lasting love I bore:                               70
Accept, O heaven, of woes like ours,
And let us, let us weep no more.
The dismal scene was o'er and past,
The lover's mournful hearse retir'd;
The maid drew back her languid head,                              75
And sighing forth his name, expir'd.
Tho' justice ever must prevail,
The tear my Kitty sheds is due;
For seldom shall she hear a tale
So sad, so tender, and so true.                                 80
great variety of measures: he mentions 136 different kinds, without
including rhyme, or a correspondence of final syllables, yet this was
occasionally used, as appears from the Ode of Egil, which Wormius hath
inserted in his book.
He hath analysed the structure of one of these kinds of verse, the
harmony of which neither depended on the quantity of the syllables,
like that of the ancient Greeks and Romans; nor on the rhymes at the
end, as in modern poetry; but consisted altogether in alliteration, or
a certain artful repetition of the sounds in the middle of the verses.
This was adjusted according to certain rules of their prosody, one
of which was, that every distich should contain at least three words
beginning with the same letter or sound. Two of these correspondent
sounds might be placed either in the first or second line of the
distich, and one in the other: but all three were not regularly to be
crowded into one line. This will be best understood by the following
"_M_eire og _M_inne
_M_ogu heimdaller."
"_G_ab _G_inuga
Enn _G_ras huerge."
There were many other little niceties observed by the Islandic poets,
who, as they retained their original language and peculiarities longer
than the other nations of Gothic race, had time to cultivate their
native poetry more, and to carry it to a higher pitch of refinement,
than any of the rest.
Their brethren, the Anglo-Saxon poets, occasionally used the same kind
of alliteration, and it is common to meet, in their writings, with
similar examples of the foregoing rules. Take an instance or two in
"_Sk_eop tha and _Sk_yrede
_Sk_yppend ure."
"_H_am and _H_eahsetl
_H_eofena rikes."
I know not, however, that there is anywhere extant an entire Saxon poem
all in this measure. But distichs of this sort perpetually occur in all
their poems of any length.
Now if we examine the versification of Pierce Plowman's _Visions_, we
shall find it constructed exactly by these rules; and therefore each
line, as printed, is in reality a distich of two verses, and will, I
believe, be found distinguished as such, by some mark or other in all
the ancient MSS. viz.:
I _Sh_ope me into _Sh_roubs, | as I a _Sh_epe were;
In _H_abite as an _H_armet | un_H_oly of werkes,
_W_ent _W_yde in thys world | _W_onders to heare, &c."
So that the author of this poem will not be found to have invented any
new mode of versification, as some have supposed, but only to have
retained that of the old Saxon and Gothic poets; which was probably
never wholly laid aside, but occasionally used at different intervals:
though the ravages of time will not suffer us now to produce a regular
series of poems entirely written in it.
There are some readers whom it may gratify to mention, that these
_Visions of Pierce_ (_i.e._ Peter) _the Plowman_, are attributed
to Robert Langland, a secular priest, born at Mortimer's Cleobury in
Shropshire, and fellow of Oriel College in Oxford, who flourished in
the reigns of Edward III. and Richard II., and published his poem a
exhibiting a series of visions which, he pretends, happened to him on
Malvern hills in Worcestershire. The author excells in strong allegoric
painting, and has with great humour, spirit, and fancy, censured most
of the vices incident to the several professions of life; but he
particularly inveighs against the corruptions of the clergy, and the
absurdities of superstition. Of this work I have now before me four
different editions in black-letter quarto. Three of them are printed in
remarkable that two of these are mentioned in the title-page as both of
the second impression, though they contain evident variations in every
olde copy ... by Owen Rogers," Feb. 21, 1561.
As Langland was not the first, so neither was he the last that used
this alliterative species of versification. To Rogers's edition of the
_Visions_ is subjoined a poem, which was probably writ in imitation of
them, intitled _Pierce the Ploughman's Crede_. It begins thus:
"_C_ros, and _C_urteis _C_hrist, this beginning spede
For the _F_aders _F_rendshipe, that _F_ourmed heaven,
And through the _Sp_ecial _Sp_irit, that _Sp_rong of hem tweyne,
And al in one godhed endles dwelleth."
The author feigns himself ignorant of his Creed, to be instructed in
which he applies to the four religious orders, viz., the gray friers
of St. Francis, the black friers of St. Dominic, the Carmelites or
white friers, and the Augustines. This affords him occasion to describe
in very lively colours the sloth, ignorance, and immorality of those
reverend drones. At length he meets with Pierce, a poor ploughman,
who resolves his doubts, and instructs him in the principles of true
religion. The author was evidently a follower of Wiccliff, whom he
died in 1384. How long after his death this poem was written, does not
appear.
two of which are written in this alliterative metre, and have the
division of the lines into distichs distinctly marked by a point, as is
usual in old poetical MSS. That which stands first of the two (though
perhaps the latest written) is entitled _The Sege of I'erlam_, (_i.e._
Jerusalem), being an old fabulous legend composed by some monk, and
stuffed with marvellous figments concerning the destruction of the holy
city and temple. It begins thus:
"In _T_yberius _T_yme. the _T_rewe emperour
_S_yr _S_esar hymself. be_S_ted in Rome
Whyll _P_ylat was _P_rovoste. under that _P_rynce ryche
And _J_ewes _J_ustice also. of _J_udeas londe
_H_erode under empere. as _H_erytage wolde
_K_yng, &c."
The other is intitled _Chevalere Assigne_ (or De Cigne), that is, _The
Knight of the Swan_, being an ancient Romance, beginning thus:
"All-_W_eldynge God. _W_hene it is his _W_ylle
_W_ele he _W_ereth his _W_erke. _W_ith his owene honde
For this, &c."
of the adventures of this same Knight of the Swan, "newly translated
out of Frenshe into Englyshe, at thinstigacion of the puyssaunt and
illustryous prynce, lorde Edward duke of Buckynghame." This lord it
seems had a peculiar interest in the book, for, in the preface, the
translator tells us, that this "highe dygne and illustryous prynce
my lorde Edwarde by the grace of god Duke of Buckyngham, erle of
Hereforde, Stafforde, and Northampton, desyrynge cotydyally to encrease
and augment the name and fame of such as were relucent in vertuous
feates and triumphaunt actes of chyvalry, and to encourage and styre
every lusty and gentell herte by the exemplyficacyon of the same,
havyng a goodli booke of the highe and miraculous histori of a famous
and puyssaunt kynge, named Oryant, sometime reynynge in the parties
of beyonde the sea, havynge to his wife a noble lady; of whome she
conceyved sixe sonnes and a daughter, and chylded of them at one
only time; at whose byrthe echone of them had a chayne of sylver at
their neckes, the whiche were all tourned by the provydence of god
into whyte swannes, save one, of the whiche this present hystory is
compyled, named Helyas, the knight of the swanne, _of whome linially is
dyscended my sayde lorde_. The whiche ententifly to have the sayde
hystory more amply and unyversally knowen in thys hys natif countrie,
as it is in other, hath of hys hie bountie by some of his faithful and
said vertuous hystori in prynte ... at whose instigacion and stiring I
(Roberte Copland) have me applied, moiening the helpe of god, to reduce
and translate it into our maternal and vulgare english tonge after the
capacite and rudenesse of my weke entendement." A curious picture of
the times! While in Italy literature and the fine arts were ready to
burst forth with classical splendor under Leo X. the first peer of this
realm was proud to derive his pedigree from a fabulous knight of the
To return to the metre of Pierce Plowman: In the folio MS. so often
quoted in these volumes, are two poems written in that species of
versification. One of these is an ancient allegorical poem intitled
_Death and Life_, (in 2 fitts or parts, containing 458 distichs) which,
for ought that appears, may have been written as early, if not before,
the time of Langland. The first forty lines are broke as they should be
into distichs, a distinction that is neglected in the remaining part of
the transcript, in order, I suppose, to save room. It begins:
"_Chr_ist _Chr_isten king,
that on the _Cr_osse tholed;
Hadd _Pa_ines and _Pa_ssyons
to defend our soules;
Give us _Gr_ace on the _Gr_ound
the _Gr_eatlye to serve,
For that _R_oyall _R_ed blood
that _R_ann from thy side."
The subject of this piece is a vision, wherein the poet sees a contest
for superiority between "our lady Dame Life," and the "ugly fiend
Dame Death;" who with their several attributes and concomitants
are personified in a fine vein of allegoric painting. Part of the
description of Dame Life is:
"Shee was _B_righter of her _B_lee,
then was the _B_right sonn:
Her _R_udd _R_edder then the _R_ose,
that on the _R_ise hangeth:
_M_eekely smiling with her _M_outh,
And _M_erry in her lookes;
Ever _L_aughing for _L_ove,
as shee _L_ike would.
And as shee came by the _B_ankes,
the _B_oughes eche one
They _L_owted to that _L_adye,
and _L_ayd forth their branches;
_B_lossomes, and _B_urgens
_B_reathed full sweete;
_F_lowers _F_lourished in the _F_rith,
where shee _F_orth stepped;
And the _Gr_asse, that was _Gr_ay,
_Gr_eened belive."
Death is afterwards sketched out with a no less bold and original
pencil.
The other poem is that which is quoted in the 32nd page of this volume,
and which was probably the last that was ever written in this kind of
metre in its original simplicity unaccompanied with rhyme. It should
have been observed above in page 32, that in this poem the lines are
throughout divided into distichs, thus:
"_Gr_ant _Gr_acious God,
_Gr_ant me this time," &c.
It is intitled _Scottish Feilde_ (in 2 fitts, 420 distichs,) containing
a very circumstantial narrative of the battle of Flodden, fought Sept.
speaking in the first person plural:
"Then _we T_ild downe _our T_ents,
that _T_old were a thousand."
In the conclusion of the poem he gives this account of himself:
"He was a _G_entleman by _J_esu,
for _S_ooth and noe other.
At _B_agily that _B_earne
his _B_iding place had;
And his ancestors of old time
Before William _C_onquerour
this _C_untry did inhabitt.
that _B_rought us forth of _Bale_,
That hath _H_earkned me _H_eare
or _H_eard my _tale_."
The village of Bagily or Baguleigh is in Cheshire, and had belonged
to the ancient family of Legh for two centuries before the battle
of Flodden. Indeed that the author was of that county appears from
other passages in the body of the poem, particularly from the pains
he takes to wipe off a stain from the Cheshiremen, who it seems ran
away in that battle, and from his encomiums on the Stanleys, earls of
Derby, who usually headed that county. He laments the death of James
Stanley, bishop of Ely, as what had recently happened when this poem
was written; which serves to ascertain its date, for that prelate died
March 22, 1514-5.
Thus have we traced the alliterative measure so low as the sixteenth
century. It is remarkable that all such poets as used this kind of
metre, retained along with it many peculiar Saxon idioms, particularly
such as were appropriated to poetry: this deserves the attention of
those who are desirous to recover the laws of the ancient Saxon poesy,
usually given up as inexplicable: I am of opinion that they will find
About the beginning of the sixteenth century this kind of versification
began to change its form: the author of _Scottish Field_, we see,
concludes his poem with a couplet in rhyme: this was an innovation
that did but prepare the way for the general admission of that more
modish ornament; till at length the old uncouth verse of the ancient
writers would no longer go down without it. Yet when rhyme began to be
superadded, all the niceties of alliteration were at first retained
along with it; and the song of _Little John Nobody_ exhibits this
union very clearly. By degrees the correspondence of final sounds
engrossing the whole attention of the poet, and fully satisfying the
reader, the internal imbellishment of alliteration was no longer
studied, and thus was this kind of metre at length swallowed up and
never used but in ballads and pieces of light humour, as in the song of
_Conscience_, and in that well-known doggerel,
"A cobler there was, and he lived in a stall."
But although this kind of measure hath with us been thus degraded, it
still retains among the French its ancient dignity; their grand heroic
old alliterative metre of the ancient Gothic and Francic poets, stript
like our Anapestic of its alliteration, and ornamented with rhyme: but
with this difference, that whereas this kind of verse hath been applied
by us only to light and trivial subjects, to which by its quick and
lively measure it seemed best adapted, our poets have let it remain
and strictness would have been inconsistent with the light and airy
subjects to which they have applied it. On the other hand, the French
having retained this verse as the vehicle of their epic and tragic
flights, in order to give it a stateliness and dignity were obliged to
confine it to more exact laws of scansion: they have therefore limited
it to the number of twelve syllables; and by making the caesura or pause
as full and distinct as possible, and by other severe restrictions,
have given it all the solemnity of which it was capable. The harmony of
both however depends so much on the same flow of cadence and disposal
of the pause, that they appear plainly to be of the same original; and
every French heroic verse evidently consists of the ancient distich
of their Francic ancestors: which, by the way, will account to us why
this verse of the French so naturally resolves itself into two complete
hemistics. And indeed by making the caesura or pause always to rest
on the last syllable of a word, and by making a kind of pause in the
sense, the French poets do in effect reduce their hemistics to two
distinct and independent verses: and some of their old poets have gone
After all, the old alliterative and anapestic metre of the English
poets being chiefly used in a barbarous age, and in a rude unpolished
language, abounds with verses defective in length, proportion, and
harmony; and therefore cannot enter into a comparison with the
correct versification of the best modern French writers; but making
allowances for these defects, that sort of metre runs with a cadence
so exactly resembling the French heroic Alexandrine, that I believe
no peculiarities of their versification can be produced, which cannot
be exactly matched in the alliterative metre. I shall give by way of
example a few lines from the modern French poets accommodated with
parallels from the ancient poem of _Life and Death_; in these I shall
denote the caesura or pause by a perpendicular line, and the cadence by
the marks of the Latin quantity.
To conclude: the metre of Pierce Plowman's Visions has no kind of
affinity with what is commonly called blank verse; yet has it a sort
of harmony of its own, proceeding not so much from its alliteration,
as from the artful disposal of its cadence, and the contrivance of
its pause; so that when the ear is a little accustomed to it, it is
by no means unpleasing; but claims all the merit of the French heroic
numbers, only far less polished; being sweetened, instead of their
final rhymes, with the internal recurrence of similar sounds.
Since the foregoing essay was first printed, the Editor hath met with
some additional examples of the old alliterative metre.
With thi _H_alwes in _H_even _H_eried mote thu be,
And thy _W_orshipful _W_erkes _W_orshiped evre,
That suche _S_ondry _S_ignes _S_hewest unto man,
The Author from this proemium takes occasion to give an account of a
dream that happened to himself: which he introduces with the following
circumstances:
"_O_nes y me _O_rdayned, as y have _O_fte doon,
With _F_rendes, and _F_elawes, _F_rendemen, and other;
And _C_aught me in a _C_ompany on _C_orpus _C_hristi even,
To take _M_elodye, and _M_irthes, among my _M_akes;
With _R_edyng of _R_omaunces, and _R_evelyng among,
The _D_ym of the _D_erknesse _D_rewe me into the west;
And be_G_on for to spryng in the _G_rey day.
Than _L_ift y up my _L_yddes, and _L_oked in the sky,
And _K_newe by the _K_ende _C_ours, hit clered in the est:
_B_lyve y _B_usked me down, and to _B_ed went,
For to _C_omforte my _K_ynde, and _C_acche a slepe."
He then describes his dream:
"Methought that y _H_oved on _H_igh on an _H_ill,
And loked _D_oun on a _D_ale _D_epest of othre;
Ther y _S_awe in my _S_ighte a _S_elcouthe peple;
The _M_ultitude was so _M_oche, it _M_ighte not be nombred:
Methoughte y herd a _C_rowned _K_yng, of his _C_omunes axe
With that a _C_lerk _K_neled adowne and _C_arped these wordes,
_L_iege _L_ord, yif it you _L_ike to _L_isten a while,
_S_om _S_awes of _S_alomon y shall you shewe sone."
The writer then gives a solemn lecture to kings on the art of
governing. From the demand of subsidies "to susteyne his werres," I am
inclined to believe this poem composed in the reign of K. Henry V., as
the MS. appears from a subsequent entry to have been written before the
The alliterative metre was no less popular among the old Scottish
poets, than with their brethren on this side the Tweed. In Maitland's
collection of ancient Scottish poems, MS. in the Pepysian library, is a
very long poem in this species of versification, thus inscribed:
"_Heir_ begins the Tretis of the Twa Marriit Wemen, and the Wedo,
Upon the _M_idsummer evven _M_irriest of nichtis
I _M_uvit furth alane quhen as _M_idnight was past
Quairon ane _B_ird on ane _B_ransche so _B_irst out hir notis
The Author pretends to overhear three gossips sitting in an arbour,
and revealing all their secret methods of alluring and governing the
other sex; it is a severe and humorous satire on bad women, and nothing
inferior to Chaucer's Prologue to his _Wife of Bath's Tale_. As
Dunbar lived till about the middle of the sixteenth century, this poem
was probably composed after _Scottish Field_ (described above in p.
This poem contains about five hundred lines.
But the current use of the alliterative metre in Scotland, appears more
particularly from those popular vulgar prophecies, which are still
printed for the use of the lower people in Scotland, under the names
of Thomas the Rymer, Marvellous Merling, &c. This collection seems to
have been put together after the accession of James I. to the crown
of England, and most of the pieces in it are in the metre of _Pierce
Plowman's Visions_, The first of them begins thus:
"Merling sayes in his book, who will _R_ead _R_ight,
Although his _S_ayings be uncouth, they _S_hall be true found.
In the seventh chapter, read _W_hoso _W_ill,
One thousand and more after Christ's birth, &c."
And the prophesie of Beid:
"Betwixt the chief of _S_ummer and the _S_ad winter;
Before the _H_eat of summer _H_appen shall a war
That _E_urop's lands _E_arnestly shall be wrought
And _E_arnest _E_nvy shall last but a while, &c."
So again the prophesie of Berlington:
"When the _R_uby is _R_aised, _R_est is there none,
But much _R_ancour shall _R_ise in _R_iver and plain
Much _S_orrow is _S_een through a _S_uth-hound
That beares _H_ornes in his _H_ead like a wyld _H_art, &c."
In like metre is the prophesie of Waldhave:
"Upon _L_owdon _L_aw alone as I _L_ay,
_L_ooking to the _L_ennox, as me _L_ief thought,
The first _M_orning of _M_ay, _M_edicine to seek
For _M_alice and _M_elody that _M_oved me sore, &c."
And lastly, that intitled the prophesie of Gildas:
"When holy kirk is _W_racked and _W_ill has no _W_it
And _P_astors are _P_luckt, and _P_il'd without _P_ity
When _I_dolatry _I_s _I_n _ens_ and _re_
And spiritual pastours are vexed away, &c."
It will be observed in the foregoing specimens, that the alliteration
is extremely neglected, except in the third and fourth instances;
although all the rest are written in imitation of the cadence used in
this kind of metre. It may perhaps appear from an attentive perusal,
that the poems ascribed to Berlington and Waldhave are more ancient
than the others: indeed the first and fifth appear evidently to have
been new modelled, if not intirely composed about the beginning of the
last century, and are probably the latest attempts ever made in this
species of verse.
In this and the foregoing essay are mentioned all the specimens I have
met with of the alliterative metre without rhyme: but instances occur
sometimes in old manuscripts, of poems written both with final rhymes
and the internal cadence and alliterations of the metre of Pierce
Plowman.
This Essay will receive illustration from another specimen in Warton's
_History of English Poetry_, vol. i. p. 309, being the fragment of
a MS. poem on the subject of _Alexander the Great_, in the Bodleian
Library, which he supposes to be the same with No. 44 in the Ashmol.
MSS. containing twenty-seven _passus_, and beginning thus:
Some farand thing, &c."
It is well observed by Mr. Tyrwhitt on Chaucer's sneer at this old
alliterative metre (vol. iii. p. 305), viz.:
I cannot geste, rom, ram, raf, by my letter,"
that the fondness for this species of versification, &c. was retained
longest in the northern provinces: and that the author of _Pierce
Plowman's Visions_ is in the best MSS. called _William_, without any
surname. See vol. iv. p. 74.
Early English Text Society, has written _An Essay on Alliterative_
_Poetry_, for Hales and Furnivall's edition of the Percy folio
MS., which will be found in the third volume of that work (pp.
xi.-xxxix.). He gives a list of all the poems he has met with that
have been written as alliterative, yet without rhyme, since the
Conquest, and ends his essay with the following note:--"The reader
must be warned against three extraordinary mis-statements in this
(Percy's) essay, following close upon one another near the end of
it. These are (1) that Robert of Gloucester wrote in anapaestic
verse, whereas he wrote in the long Alexandrine verse, containing
(when perfect) six _Returns_; (2) that the French alone have
for their serious poems, whereas we may be sure that Michael
Drayton, the author of the Polyolbion, meant his poem seriously;
and (3) that the cadence of _Piers Plowman_ 'so exactly resembles
the French Alexandrine, that I believe no peculiarities of their
versification can be produced which cannot be exactly matched in
the alliterative metre.' This is indeed a curious craze, for the
alliterative metre is founded on _Dominants_, the Alexandrine
on _Returns_. Percy gives some examples, and the metre which he
selects for numbering is the _French_ one, as the reader may easily
judge for himself when he finds that the line
is marked by him as it is marked here, and is supposed to consist
of _four Anapaests_! Yet one more blunder to be laid at the door of
the 'Anapaests!' Would that we were well rid of them, and that the
_Islandic_ language is of the same origin as our _Anglo-Saxon_, being
both dialects of the ancient _Gothic_ or _Teutonic_. Vid. _Hickesii
Praefat. in Grammat. Anglo-Saxon. & Moeso-Goth_, 4to. 1689.
MS. or "set," as in PCC.
by the author, seems only to denote the break or division between two
parts, though by the ignorance of the printer applied to the parts
themselves. See vol. iii. preface to ballad iii. where _Passus_ seems
to signify _Pause_.
the title-page, "nowe the seconde tyme imprinted by Roberte Crowlye;"
the other thus, "nowe the seconde time imprinted by Robert Crowley." In
the former the folios are thus erroneously numbered 39, 39, 41, 63, 43,
to multiply editions.
"{pilcrow} Imprinted at London by me Wylliam Copland."
Boulogne, through whom I suppose the duke made out his relation to him.
This duke was beheaded May 17, 1521, 13 Hen. VIII.
pronounce "Earth," in some parts of England "Yearth," particularly in
the north.--Pitscottie speaking of James III. slain at Bannockbourn,
says, "Nae man wot whar they _yearded_ him."
upon every third syllable. This kind of verse, which I also call the
burlesque Alexandrine (to distinguish it from the other Alexandrines
of eleven and fourteen syllables, the parents of our lyric measure:
see examples, pp. 151, 152, &c.), was early applied by Robert of
Gloucester to serious subjects. That writer's metre, like this of
Langland's, is formed on the Saxon models (each verse of his containing
a Saxon distich), only instead of the internal alliterations adopted by
Langland, he rather chose final rhymes, as the French poets have done
since. Take a specimen:
"The Saxons tho in ther power, tho thii were so rive,
Seve kingdoms made in Engelonde, and suthe but vive:
The king of Northomberlond, and of Eastangle also,
Of Kent, and of Westsex, and of the March, therto."
Robert of Gloucester wrote in the western dialect, and his language
differs exceedingly from that of other contemporary writers, who
resided in the metropolis, or in the midland counties. Had the
Heptarchy continued, our English language would probably have been as
much distinguished for its different dialects as the Greek; or at least
as that of the several independent states of Italy.
It is remarkable that the French alone have retained this old Gothic
metre for their serious poems; while the English, Spaniards, &c. have
adopted the Italic verse of ten syllables, although the Spaniards, as
well as we, anciently used a short-lined metre. I believe the success
with which Petrarch, and perhaps one or two others, first used the
heroic verse of ten syllables in Italian poesy, recommended it to the
Spanish writers; as it also did to our Chaucer, who first attempted it
in English; and to his successors Lord Surrey, Sir Thomas Wyat, &c.;
who afterwards improved it and brought it to perfection. To Lord Surrey
we also owe the first introduction of blank verse in his versions of
the second and fourth Books of the _AEneid_, 1557, 4to.
and even ten syllables. For though regularly it consists of four
a syllable from the first or third Anapest; and sometimes from both; as
in these instances from _Prior_, and from the Song of Conscience:
&c. In the same book are also specimens of alliterative French verses.
hands.
_Ancient Scottish Poems, &c._ from the MS. Collections of Sir R.
Maitland, of Lethington, knight, of London, 1786, 2 vols. 12mo. The two
first lines are here corrected by that edition.
Agincourt, For the Victory at, 29.
Aldingar (Sir), 54.
Althea (To) from Prison, 321.
Argentile and Curan, 252.
As ye came from the Holy Land, 101.
Baffled Knight, or Lady's Policy, 336.
Barton (Sir Andrew), 188.
Beggar's Daughter of Bednall Green, 171.
Bothwell's (Lady Anne) Lament, 209.
Braes of Yarrow, 362.
Charing Cross, Downfall of, 323.
Charles I., Verses by, 329.
Chaucer, Original Ballad by, 14.
Complaint of Conscience, 279.
Corin's Fate, 262.
Corydon's Doleful Knell, 274.
Cromwell (Thomas Lord), 71.
Cupid's Assault, by Lord Vaux, 50.
Dawson (Jemmy), 371.
Distracted Lover, 355.
Distracted Puritan, 347.
Edward I., On the Death of, 10.
Edward IV. and Tanner of Tamworth, 92.
Eleanor's (Q.) Confession, 164.
Elizabeth's (Q.) Verses while Prisoner at Woodstock, 137.
---- Sonnet, 218.
Fair Rosamond, 154.
Fancy and Desire, 185.
Frantic Lady, 357.
Gaberlunyie Man, 67.
Gascoigne's Praise of the Fair Bridges, afterwards Lady Sandes, 150.
Gentle Herdsman, tell to me, 86.
Hardyknute, 105.
Harpalus, 75.
Heir of Linne, 138.
Hosier's (Admiral) Ghost, 367.
James I., Verses by, 300.
Jane Shore, 263.
John Anderson, my Jo, 131.
John (King) and the Abbot of Canterbury, 303.
King of Scots and Andrew Browne, 221.
Lady distracted with Love, 354.
Lilli Burlero, 358.
Little John Nobody, 133.
Loyalty Confined, 326.
Lunatic Lover, 351.
Luther, the Pope, a Cardinal, and a Husbandman, 125.
Lye (The), by Sir Walter Raleigh, 297.
Mary Ambree, 231.
Murder of the King of Scots, 213.
Murray, Bonny Earl of, 226.
Not-Browne Maid, 31.
Old Tom of Bedlam, 344.
Old and Young Courtier, 314.
Plain Truth and Blind Ignorance, 285.
Richard of Almaigne, 3.
Rivers (Earl), Balet by, 48.
Robin and Makyne, 79.
Sale of Rebellious Houshold Stuff, 332.
Spanish Lady's Love, 247.
Sturdy Rock, 169.
Suckling's (Sir John) Campaigne, 318.
Turnament of Tottenham, 17.
Victorious Men of Earth, 242.
Wandering Jew, 291.
Why so Pale, 343.
Willoughbey, Brave Lord, 238.
Winning of Cales, 243.
You meaner Beauties, 312.
Young Waters, 228.
Transcriber's Notes:
Simple spelling, grammar, and typographical errors
were corrected.
Punctuation normalized.
Anachronistic and non-standard spellings retained as printed.
ERRATA on p. vii were incorporated in the document.
Italics markup is enclosed in _underscores_.
Greek text is transliterated and enclosed in #number signs#.
Anglo-Saxon uncial script is enclosed in +plus sign+.
Special Characters and Symbols.
reve