This is an electronic edition of Volume One of Edmund Spenser's
_Faerie Queene_. You are encouraged to use and copy it.
The edition includes the following elements:
-  an entirely new composite text, based on the edition of 1596 (the
"Original Text")
-  details of departures, or proposed departures, from the copy text
(the "Textual Appendix")
-  a modernized version of the Original Text (the "Shadow Text")
-  definitions of difficult words and phrases in the Shadow Text (the
"Glossary").
The Original Text was not scanned, but typed, and proofed against the
Scolar Press facsimile (see Bibliography).  Editing took place between
November 1989 and July 1992, using EMACS.
in February 2003.
Thus edition (August 2004) corrects a few errors in the convention for
italic type.  A few definitions appearing in the wrong place have also
been fixed, as have anomalous top-bit set characters in the Hales
Biography, which has been reformatted to make it easier to read.
The edition is best viewed with a monospaced font.  Plain ASCII
text is used throughout.  Accented, etc., characters are indicated by
symbols contained in curly brackets, e.g.:
{e/} = lower-case e + acute accent (pointing up to right)
{e\} = lower-case e + grave accent (pointing up to left)
{o^} = lower-case o + circumflex accent
{o"} = lower-case o + diaeresis mark
{e~} = lower-case e + tilde
{ae} = lower-case ae diphthong
{Ae} = ae diphthong with initial capital
{AE} = fully capitalized ae diphthong
etc.
In this way all the characters of the 1596 edition have been shown
except the long "s", which has been throughout converted to its modern
equivalent.  In Roman type, the long "s" most closely resembles a
lower-case "f" lacking part of the crossbar.  It is used in the copy-text
in nearly all places where this edition has an ordinary lower-case "s",
except at the ends of words and when preceding the letter "k".  Using
the oblique character in place of the long "s", then, the first lines of
the poem read:
Lo I the man, who/e Mu/e whilome did maske,
As time her taught in lowly Shepheards weeds,
Am now enfor/t a far vnfitter taske,
For trumpets /terne to chaunge mine Oaten reeds ...
These rules are on occasion broken, apparently by mistake.  The long
"s" does nothing to aid comprehension, and indeed causes problems, noted
in the Textual Appendix: e.g. confusion between "besit" and "befit".
Special characters contained in the list of printers' contractions
are noted in the preamble to that list.
Regions of text printed, or intended to be shown, in italic type are
defined by underscores, thus: the _second_ word is in italics.
Spenser's original text of _The Faerie Queene_ is here described as
"Spenser's Text" and is in the public domain.  The biography by
editorial treatment of Spenser's Text, is reserved.  You may not sell the
whole or any part of this edition in any form whatsoever, nor may you
supply it as an inducement to any party to purchase any product.  Except
for private study, you may not alter the text in any way.
This edition is supplied as is.  No warranty of any description is given
in relation to the edition.  Time and care have gone into its preparation,
but no guarantee of accuracy is implied or made.
In such a large work, despite the stringent and repeated manual and
electronic checking that has been carried out, some errors are bound to
have slipped through.  Please tell me about any that you find.  All readers'
emendations will be gratefully acknowledged in future releases.
-- Jonathan Barnes
Main components:
Editor's Introduction
Abbreviations Used
List of Proper Nouns
Table of Contents of Volume I
Introductory Matter
Books I-III
Printer's Contractions
Bibliography
Biographical Material
Editor's Introduction
Acknowledgements
Purpose of the edition
The text of the poem
The form of the poem
The numbering system
How the Glossary works
The Textual Appendix
Suggestions for new readers
No endeavour of this kind would be possible without the work of
previous editors and critics, and I offer thanks to all who
have advanced our understanding of Spenser and his work.  In
particular the scholarship of Professor A. C. Hamilton has
provided much enlightenment: his commentary (see Bibliography) is
required reading for those who would explore the secret meanings
of _The Faerie Queene_.  To the compilers and publishers of the
monumental _Oxford English Dictionary_ I am deeply indebted.  I
wish also to acknowledge the assistance of the staff of the
British Library, who kindly allowed me to consult copies of the
original editions.
When reading a book such as _The Faerie Queene_, it is tempting
to minimize the looking up of difficult words, which are often
glossed, if at all, in the end pages.  Although Spenser's use of
certain words appears quaint and lumpish, the language is
superficially modern enough to enable the reader to "get by".
Yet such an approach can lead only to a faulty appreciation of
the poem, and deprives one of much enchantment.  Queen Elizabeth
would have found nothing lumpish about the language: her only
impatience might have been with Spenser's weakness for archaisms.
To her, the _FQ_ will have revealed Spenser's exact and liberal
style in all its glory: his words almost always make perfect
sense.
The purpose of this edition is to make the language of the poem
readily accessible.  Interruptions to consult separate
dictionaries and so on are eliminated, preserving as far as
possible the flow of reading and accelerating one's apprehension
of the poem.
The sustained power and scope of Spenser's master-work, of his
"sacred fury", comprise a feat unsurpassed in English literature.
But, by its very nature, language changes with time, and access
to Spenser's magic kingdom is becoming ever more difficult.  I
hope this edition provides a key.
No manuscript of _The Faerie Queene_ is known; we depend for our
text upon printed copies of the work.
The first of these appeared in 1590.  It is a quarto edition,
published by William Ponsonby, and contains Books I-III.  The
Registers of the Stationers' Company for 1589 include the
following entry:
_Primo Die Decembris.--Master Ponsonbye.  Entered for his
Copye a book intituled the fayre Queene, dyposed into xii.
bookes &c.  Aucthorysed vnder thandes of the Archb. of
Canterbury & bothe the Wardens, vjd._
The date of Spenser's letter to Raleigh is 23 January 1589 (1590
New Style); the book itself appeared some time after 25 March.
The text was indifferently proof-read, and a list of corrigenda
(Faults Escaped in the Print) accompanies it.  Moreover, there is
variation between individual copies of the edition.  Early copies
contain only ten dedicatory sonnets, while later ones contain the
full set of seventeen: for Spenser had made the signal blunder of
omitting Lord Burleigh from the illustrious company of
dedicatees.  To confuse matters further, a few copies contain a
mixture of pages from the original and revised versions.
The quarto edition of 1596 was also published by Ponsonby, and
contains Books I-VI, variously bound into one or two volumes.
Books I-III were completely reset, apparently not from the MS.
but from a copy of 1590 heavily annotated by the author.  Some,
but not all, of the corrections listed in the Faults Escaped were
incorporated in 1596.  The end of Book III was changed,
continuing rather than ending the story of Scudamour and Amoret.
Spenser also added a new stanza at the beginning of Book I, Canto
xi, rewrote some single lines, and made sundry adjustments to
others.  This process continued even as pages passed through the
press, so that there is variation from copy to copy, made more
complex by the mixing of sheets from different printings during
binding.  No single copy of 1596 can therefore be said to be
definitive.  1596 does, however, have the advantage of Spenser's
personal supervision, and for this reason it is chosen as the
core of modern composite texts.
The third edition of _The Faerie Queene_ was published by Mathew
Lownes in 1609, ten years after Spenser's death.  It is a folio
edition, and contains not only Books I-VI but also two cantos
"which, both for Forme and Matter, appeare to be parcell of some
following Booke of the Faerie Queene, vnder the Legend of
Constancie".  This fragment comprises what are now called the
"Mutability Cantos".
The edition of 1609 is fundamentally a reprint of 1596.  There is
reason to suspect that its editor was guided, at least in part,
by some authorial source which has now been lost: an annotated
copy of 1596, perhaps; or material found among the assorted
papers of the Mutability Cantos.
degree of consistency and intelligibility than 1596 itself,
although it is plain that a more modern hand than Spenser's is
responsible for many of its emendations: the punctuation, for
example, though often more logical, is blander than that of the
editions produced in Spenser's lifetime.  Furthermore, the editor
of 1609 virtually ignores 1590, even though knowledge of that
text is often essential for filling in the gaps left by errors in
The editions of 1611 onwards throw little light on problems
raised by the three former editions.
A modern editor, then, must go to three different sources in
order to assemble a text which tries to do justice to Spenser's
original intention.
The copy-text for this edition is the facsimile published in 1976
by Scolar Press (see Bibliography).
The basic unit of the poem is a verse or _stanza_ made up of nine
lines.  This "Spenserian stanza", much imitated (for example, by
Byron), is Spenser's own invention.  Typically, it consists of
eight pentameters and a final alexandrine.  Lines are sometimes
short or long, on occasion perhaps through typographical error
(see for example II iii 26.9), but at other times for deliberate
effect (e.g. III iv 39.7, IV i 3).
The rhyming scheme is generally _ababbcbcc_, though this too is
subject to change, whether by authorial oversight or authorial
intention (e.g. II ii 7, VII vii 28).
The stanzas are not numbered in the original editions.
Between 30 and 87 stanzas comprise a _canto_ (Italian, "song"), a
term borrowed from Lodovico Ariosto, the Italian poet, whose work
influenced Spenser.
A canto is preceded by a four-line verse called an _argument_.
This summarizes what follows, often with particular emphasis on
its allegorical meaning.  The metre of the argument is that of
the _Book of Common Prayer_.
Each complete book is introduced by a _proem_, a group of between
four and eleven stanzas preceding the argument of Canto i.
Twelve cantos comprise a _book_.  Book VII is incomplete.
Spenser's stated plan was to write twelve books, one on each of
the twelve moral or private virtues; it is not known whether he
composed any more of _The Faerie Queene_ than has survived.  _The
Faerie Queene_ was to have been followed by another epic poem of
twelve more books, one on each of the political or public
virtues.  No trace of this work has ever been found.
The Shadow Text is intended as no more than a lowly companion to
the original.  It makes no attempt to preserve metre or rhyme,
but renders a prosaic version, unifying the spelling in order to
make the meaning easier to understand.
I have altered the punctuation for the shadow version, though not
without trepidation.  My aim has been to make crystal clear the
mechanical sense expressed by each stanza, but quite often this
is impossible.  For one thing, the original pointing, rather than
being used strictly logically, may also influence the rhythm or
emphasis of the words when spoken (and _The Faerie Queene_ is a
poem which should be read aloud--although perhaps not in its
entirety!--to be fully appreciated).  For another, the
functions of the punctuation marks themselves have undergone
change since Spenser's day.  The semicolon, for example, is found
in _FQ_ introducing direct speech, where today a comma or a colon
would be used.  Again, the comma is often required to carry long
parentheses, themselves sprinkled with commas; these passages can
become very confusing, especially where Spenser has also adopted
a contorted and latinistic word-order.
Then there are problems introduced by deliberately ambiguous
pointing.  Spenser's immense command of the language, and his
quicksilver gift for wordplay and puns, allow him, when he
chooses, to pack great complexities of meaning into a line or
even a single word, and in this his punctuation is frequently his
accomplice.
A famous example comes right at the beginning of Book I:
But on his brest a bloudie Crosse he bore,
The deare remembrance of his dying Lord,
For whose sweete sake that glorious badge he wore,
And dead as liuing euer him ador'd:
Is the meaning of line 4: "dead, as living, ever him adored", or:
"dead, as living ever, him adored"?  In fact, both meanings are
probably intended.
Thus it cannot be overemphasized that, where ambiguity is
occasioned by the punctuation of the original, the Shadow Text
can do no more than propose what seems to me the more or most
likely interpretation.  Sometimes (as in the case cited above) I
suggest alternatives, but the pointing of the original poem
should always be given precedence in case of doubt.
The Glossary does not seek to interpret the poem.  From time to
time it hints at what lies behind the bare words in order to aid
understanding, but its sole purpose is to make the _language_
more accessible to the modern reader.  Interpretation is left to
the teacher, and to the large and growing body of criticism
devoted to _The Faerie Queene_.
In the Glossary and Textual Appendix, references to parts of the
poem are given in the condensed form BCN.SN, where B = book
number (from 1 to 7), CN = canto number (from 01 to 12; canto 00
is the proem), and SN = stanza number (from 1 to a maximum of 87;
stanza 0 is the argument).
If a line within a stanza needs to be specified, it is preceded
by a colon. Ranges of cantos, stanzas, or lines are indicated by
a dash.
For example:
In addition, a line of the Introductory Matter is specified by
its number, preceded by a colon and a capital "I".  For example,
"I:123" refers to line 123 in the Introductory Matter.
Entries relating to each line of Shadow Text are shown below that
line.  In cases where a glossed word appears more than once in a
line, plus signs are used if necessary to highlight the
particular word being glossed.  For example, in the line:
Till some end they find, +or+ in or out,
it is the first "or" which is glossed.
Editorial policy in the Glossary is as follows.  Words which
appear in modern concise dictionaries and whose meanings are
unchanged are rarely glossed.  The reader is expected to
understand words such as "quoth", "hither", and "aught" in their
_modern_ senses.  Where an apparently modern form has a different
contextual meaning, it is glossed; and where the modern sense is
also to be understood, this is included in the definition.
Similar senses are grouped with commas; changes in sense are
indicated by semicolons.  For example:
The commoner obsolete forms have been silently converted: "thee"
to "you", "dost" to "does", "mought" to "might", "whenas" to
"when", and so on.  Others (generally speaking, those less common
words sufficiently distinct from their modern counterparts to
merit a separate entry in the _Shorter Oxford English
Dictionary_) have been unified to the spelling preferred by that
and its parent dictionary.  This should allow the reader, during
very close scrutiny of any passage, quickly to find any of
Spenser's words in the _OED_.
All the Glossary entries are context-sensitive: Spenser often
uses the same word in several different ways.  Thus no single
Glossary entry should be taken as generally definitive.
Types of entry
(a) Translations
An entry not enclosed in brackets should be read as a straight
translation of the quoted text which can be directly substituted
for it.
For example, in stanza 1 of the proem to Book I, line 1:
Line 1 can thus be understood to mean:
Lo I, the man whose Muse formerly did mask
Very often, additional meanings are given in such definitions:
These additional meanings may complement one another, indicating
the hybrid sense which seems to be required, or they may
constitute a set of alternative meanings, any or all of which may
have been intended by Spenser.  Each entry in any unbracketed
list may always be substituted for the original without
disturbing the syntax.
Similar senses are grouped with commas; changes in sense are
indicated with semicolons. For example:
In this case, an apparently modern form has a different
contextual meaning, and so it is glossed; and when the modern
sense is also to be understood, this is included in the
definition:
Where the contrast between alternatives is particularly great,
words are separated by _or_, _also_, etc.
Sometimes the meaning is forced or metaphorical.  In these cases
the straight "dictionary" meaning of the word is given first, and
_hence_, _thus_, or _so_ are used to indicate contextual
departure from this.  For example:
"Januarie", 10)
In this example, parenthesized editorial comment has also been
included.
Editorial comment in entries of this class is either enclosed in
round brackets, as above, or set in "italic" type, as in this
entry:
usage_: great consuming fire, funeral pyre; _hence,
perhaps_: hell-fire
A question-mark, as may be expected, indicates doubt, usually
about words which are not found in the _OED_ but whose meaning
might be inferred from the context.  For example:
grows by water)
(b) Definitions
An entry in curly brackets should be read as a dictionary
definition of the quoted text which cannot be directly fitted
into the syntax of the original line.  For example:
(c) Notes
Entries in round brackets should be read as if they were
footnotes, typically giving background information or editorial
speculation.  For example:
daughters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne (Memory); each goddess
presides over an area of the arts and sciences and gives
inspiration to its practitioners)
and:
Clio, the Muse of history, or Calliope, the Muse of epic
poetry; probably Clio.  Clio is the first of the nine Muses
in Hesiod's _Theogony_, and is usually represented with an
open roll of paper or a chest of books.  Spenser calls her
"thou eldest Sister of the crew" at _TM_ 53.  See 111.5:6-
It should be added that on occasion the distinction between a
"note", requiring round brackets, and a "definition", requiring
curly brackets, is somewhat moot.
(d) Hints and expansions
Entries in square brackets are hints or expansions to make the
quoted text more intelligible, and can be thought of as being
preceded by the qualifications "that is", "in other words", or
"what Spenser appears to mean is".  For example:
Such entries can be mentally substituted for the quoted word or
phrase in order to aid comprehension.
Sometimes square brackets are employed in other sorts of
definitions to indicate words which should be understood. For
example:
masquerade}
and:
(e) Explanations of character-names
Most of the names of major characters in the poem have special
meanings.  These are briefly explained as follows:
Sometimes there is a qualifying parenthesis giving information on
the etymology or adding comment:
Character-names from the poem and from classical mythology are
typically explained once only, on their first occurrence.  If you
encounter a name which is not defined, then it has appeared
somewhere before.  The list of proper nouns will quickly help you
to find it.
A textual appendix, detailing actual or proposed departures from
the copy-text, is incorporated.  The Textual Appendix records:
(a) obvious misprints;
(b) lections from 1590 or 1609 which seem preferable;
(c) lections from 1590 or 1609 which throw light on the spelling,
punctuation or sense of 1596;
(d) illuminating conjectures or suggestions made by Spenserian
scholars and editors.
The four main sources for the text are quoted as follows:
FE:  the corrigenda (Faults Escaped in the Print) which accompany
In the Textual Appendix, all original text is shown in "roman"
type, except where it occurs in italic type in the sources.  All
editorial comment in the Textual Appendix is shown in "italic"
type.
Examples
(a) Departures from the text of 1596
The lection from 1590 and 1609 is to be preferred, since 1596
(with an extraneous comma) appears to be in error.
The lection from 1590 is to be preferred.
The lection from 1609 is to be preferred.
The word has been supplied from the lection of 1590 and 1609.
The word has been supplied from 1590.
The word has been supplied from 1609.
All three editions contain a blatant error, which has been
corrected by editorial conjecture.
All three editions are in error and the word has been supplied
from FE.
The error occurs in 1590 and 1596, and was corrected in 1609 from
(b) Variants on the text of 1596
The variant occurs in 1590, but not in 1596 or 1609.
The variant occurs in 1609, but not in 1590 or 1596.
These two variants occur in 1590 and 1609, so that the word in
question is different in all three editions.
Morris (see Bibliography) suggested this alternative to the given
text.
So that any reader will be able to start anywhere and understand
any stanza immediately, I have glossed even the common archaisms
throughout (e.g. "gan", "eftsoons", "wont").  Occasionally,
however, as with "squire", or "palmer", or "foster", when
repetitious glossing would be locally irritating, I have glossed
the word once or twice only at the beginning of each canto.  Thus
it is possible that you will alight somewhere and find an unknown
word unglossed.
If this should happen, you will almost certainly be able to find
the word glossed in at least one other place earlier in the
canto.  Or, if it is does not seem to be glossed at all, you will
find it in any competent concise English dictionary.
Readers who are new to _The Faerie Queene_ and who are working
without the help of a teacher may be daunted by its sheer size.
Such readers are invited to sample some of the poem before
deciding to embark on a detailed reading.
If you are at present unfamiliar with Elizabethan spelling and
usage, I recommend that, in the beginning, you read each stanza
first in the Shadow Text, just to get the mechanical meaning.
Then go to the original and read that, for its structure, for its
rhythm and its music, and to absorb the idiom of the language.
After a short while you will be able to read the Original Text
immediately, referring to the Shadow Text only when difficulty is
encountered.
The following passages provide a brief survey of the variety of
Spenser's style.
crudely allegorical in the _FQ_, and shows signs of having been
drafted before Spenser hit upon his "dark conceit".  None the
less, the whole of this canto should be read as an introduction
to the poem.  Stanzas 39-41 are especially beautiful.
knights.
grotesquely medieval in tone.
quality of Spenser's imagination defeats what may have been his
original intention to produce a pastiche here.  For example, the
choice of the word "tarre" at 105.28:8 evinces artistry of the
highest order.
not to want to continue reading this canto!
speach".
often quoted out of context; 109.40 was raided by Joseph Conrad
for his epitaph.
III, here shows a gentler face.
old story is both vivid and economical.
the poet's imagination is still, unbelievably, developing, and
has yet further to go.
word-picture of Mammon himself (207.3-4) is quite superb.
tedious, nevertheless contains many striking images.  See the
potted _King Lear_ at 210.27-32.
canto is recommended to the new reader; see especially 212.42-45,
Cymodoce's grief, 304.29-39, is wonderfully portrayed.
from Venus's "little sonne" of 306.11 ff.
If your interest has been now been aroused, I suggest you read
the Letter to Raleigh before venturing on your journey through
the landscape of _The Faerie Queene_.
You will find there a spacious playground for the mind.  Its
knights and ladies, dragons and satyrs, forests and castles, seem
at first to be those of fantasy.  Yet the _FQ_ is by no means an
exercise in escapism.  Even incomplete, it triumphantly succeeds
in Spenser's declared intention of fashioning a "noble person in
vertuous and gentle discipline".
adj.        adjective, adjectival, adjectivally
adv.        adverb, adverbial, adverbially
_Aen._      _Aeneid_ (Virgil)
app.        apparently
BC          before Christ
c.          circa, about
catachr.    catachresis, catachrestic, catachrestically
_CC_        _Colin Clouts Come Home Againe_ (Spenser)
cf.         compare
_Col._      _Colossians_
conj.       conjectured by
corr.       corrected by
_Dan._      _Daniel_
_DGDG_      _De Genealogia Deorum Gentilium_ (Boccaccio)
_Deut._     _Deuteronomy_
dub.        dubitative, dubitatively
_Eccl._     _Ecclesiastes_
_Ephes._    _Ephesians_
erron.      erroneous, erroneously
esp.        especial, especially
_et seq_.   and the following words, passages
euphem.     euphemism, euphemistic, euphemistically
_Exod._     _Exodus_
_Ezek._     _Ezekiel_
ff.         following, _et. seq._
fig.        figurative, figuratively
fl.         floruit (indicating the period during which a
person "flourished"
_FQ_        _The Faerie Queene_
_Gal._      _Galatians_
_Gen._      _Genesis_
_GL_        _Gerusalemme Liberata_ (Tasso)
_Heb._      _Hebrews_
_Hos._      _Hosea_
_HRB_       _Historia Regum Britanniae_ (Geoffrey of Monmouth)
_Hubberd_   _Mother Hubberds Tale_ (Spenser)
intr.       intransitive, intransitively
_Isa._      _Isaiah_
_Josh._     _Joshua_
_Judg._     _Judges_
lit.        literal, literally
_LR_        Spenser's letter to Raleigh (see Introductory Matter)
_Matt._     _Matthew_
_Met._      _Metamorphoses_ (Ovid)
_Myth._     _Mythologiae_ (Comes)
_Odes_      _Odes_ (Ovid)
OE          Old English
_OED_       _Oxford English Dictionary_, 1989 edition
_OF_        _Orlando Furioso_ (Ariosto)
OFr         Old French
_PL_        _Paradise Lost_ (Milton)
ppl.        past participle
prep.       preposition, prepositional, prepositionally
_Ps._       _Psalms_
refl.       reflexive, reflexively
_Rev._      _Revelation_
_Rinaldo_   _Rinaldo_ (Tasso)
_Rom._      _Romans_
_RR_        _Ruines of Rome_ (Spenser)
sb.         substantive, substantival, substantivally
_SC_        _The Shepheardes Calender_ (Spenser)
_Song Sol._ _Song of Solomon_
sp., spp.   species
SU          sense unique (i.e. this sense is found only here)
SUFQ        sense unique to _FQ_
sugg.       suggested by
SUS         sense unique to Spenser
_TM_        _Teares of the Muses_ (Spenser)
trans.      transitive, transitively
usu.        usually
Var.        the variorum edition of Spenser's works (see
Bibliography)
vb.         verb
WU          word unique (i.e. this word is found only here)
WUFQ        word unique to _FQ_
WUS         word unique to Spenser
The proper nouns in Books I-III (excluding the Introductory
Matter) are catalogued here.  The spellings given are those used
in the Shadow Text.  If the proper noun is glossed, reference to
the stanza or stanzas containing the glossary entry or entries is
given; otherwise, the stanza where the proper noun first occurs
is noted.
The list has been extended to include characters who are not
actually named.  Entries for such characters begin with a lower-
case letter.  For example, Una's dwarf is listed as: dwarf
The categories are as follows:
Briton)
Title page
Dedication
A letter to Sir Walter Raleigh
Commendatory Verses
A Vision vpon this conceipt of the _Faery Queene_
Another of the same (W. R.)
To the learned Shepheard (Hobinoll)
Fayre _Thamis_ streame, that from _Ludds_ stately towne (R. S.)
Graue Muses march in triumph and with prayses (H. B.)
When stout _Achilles_ heard of _Helens_ rape (W. L.)
To looke vpon a work of rare deuise (Ignoto)
Dedicatory Sonnets
Sir Christopher Hatton
William Cecil, Lord Burleigh
Edward de Vere, Earl of Oxford
Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland
George Clifford, Earl of Cumberland
Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex
Thomas Butler, Earl of Ormond and Ossory
Charles, Lord Howard of Effingham
Henry Carey, Lord Hunsdon
Arthur, Lord Grey de Wilton
Thomas Sackville, Earl of Dorset and Baron Buckhurst
Sir Francis Walsingham
Sir John Norris
Sir Walter Raleigh
Mary Herbert, Countess of Pembroke
Lady Elizabeth Spencer Carey
Ladies in the Court
Book I
Proem
Canto i
The Patron of true Holinesse,
Foule Errour doth defeate:
Hypocrisie him to entrape,
Doth to his home entreate.
Canto ii
The guilefull great Enchaunter parts
The Redcrosse Knight from Truth:
Into whose stead faire falshood steps,
And workes him wofull ruth.
Canto iii
Forsaken Truth long seekes her loue,
And makes the Lyon mylde,
Marres blind Deuotions mart, and fals
In hand of leachour vylde.
Canto iv
To sinfull house of Pride, Duessa
guides the faithfull knight,
Where brothers death to wreak Sansioy
doth chalenge him to fight.
Canto v
The faithfull knight in equall field
subdewes his faithlesse foe,
Whom false Duessa saues, and for
his cure to hell does goe.
Canto vi
From lawlesse lust by wondrous grace
fayre Vna is releast:
Whom saluage nation does adore,
and learnes her wise beheast.
Canto vii
The Redcrosse knight is captiue made
By Gyaunt proud opprest,
Prince Arthur meets with Vna great-
ly with those newes distrest.
Canto viii
Faire virgin to redeeme her deare
brings Arthur to the fight:
Who slayes the Gyant, wounds the beast,
and strips Duessa quight.
Canto ix
His loues and lignage Arthur tells:
The knights knit friendly bands:
Sir Treuisan flies from Despayre,
Whom Redcrosse knight withstands.
Canto x
Her faithfull knight faire Vna brings
to house of Holinesse,
Where he is taught repentance, and
the way to heauenly blesse.
Canto xi
The knight with that old Dragon fights
two dayes incessantly:
The third him ouerthrowes, and gayns
most glorious victory.
Canto xii
Faire Vna to the Redcrosse knight
betrouthed is with ioy:
Though false Duessa it to barre
her false sleights doe imploy.
Book II
Proem
Canto i
Guyon by Archimage abusd,
The Redcrosse knight awaytes,
Findes Mordant and Amauia slaine
With pleasures poisoned baytes.
Canto ii
Babes bloudie hands may not be clensd,
the face of golden Meane.
Her sisters two Extremities:
striue her to banish cleane.
Canto iii
Vaine Braggadocchio getting Guyons
horse is made the scorne
Of knighthood trew, and is of fayre
Belphoebe fowle forlorne.
Canto iv
Guyon does Furor bind in chaines,
and stops Occasion:
Deliuers Phedon, and therefore
by strife is rayld vpon.
Canto v
Pyrochles does with Guyon fight,
And Furors chayne vnbinds
Of whom sore hurt, for his reuenge
Atin Cymochles finds.
Canto vi
Guyon is of immodest Merth,
led into loose desire,
Fights with Cymochles, whiles his bro-
ther burnes in furious fire.
Canto vii
Guyon findes Mamon in a delue,
Sunning his threasure hore:
Is by him tempted, and led downe,
To see his secret store.
Canto viii
Sir Guyon laid in swowne is by
Acrates sonnes despoyld,
Whom Arthur soone hath reskewed
And Paynim brethren foyld.
Canto ix
The house of Temperance, in which
doth sober Alma dwell,
Besiegd of many foes, whom straunger
knightes to flight compell.
Canto x
A chronicle of Briton kings,
from Brute to Vthers rayne.
And rolles of Elfin Emperours,
till time of Gloriane.
Canto xi
The enimies of Temperaunce
besiege her dwelling place:
Prince Arthur them repelles, and fowle
Maleger doth deface.
Canto xii
Guyon by Palmers gouernance,
passing through perils great,
Doth ouerthrow the Bowre of blisse,
and Acrasie defeat.
Book III
Proem
Canto i
Guyon encountreth Britomart,
faire Florimell is chaced:
Duessaes traines and Malecastaes
champions are defaced.
Canto ii
The Redcrosse knight to Britomart
describeth Artegall:
The wondrous myrrhour, by which she
in loue with him did fall.
Canto iii
Merlin bewrayes to Britomart,
the state of Artegall.
And shewes the famous Progeny
which from them springen shall.
Canto iv
Bold Marinell of Britomart,
Is throwne on the Rich strond:
Faire Florimell of Arthur is
Long followed, but not fond.
Canto v
Prince Arthur heares of Florimell:
three fosters Timias wound,
Belphebe finds him almost dead,
and reareth out of sownd.
Canto vi
The birth of faire Belphoebe and
Of Amoret is told.
The Gardins of Adonis fraught
With pleasures manifold.
Canto vii
The witches sonne loues Florimell:
she flyes, he faines to die.
Satyrane saues the Squire of Dames
from Gyants tyrannie.
Canto viii
The Witch creates a snowy Lady,
like to Florimell,
Who wrongd by Carle by Proteus sau'd,
is sought by Paridell.
Canto ix
Malbecco will no straunge knights host,
For peeuish gealosie:
Paridell giusts with Britomart:
Both shew their auncestrie.
Canto x
Paridell rapeth Hellenore:
Malbecco her pursewes:
Findes emongst Satyres, whence with him
To turne she doth refuse.
Canto xi
Britomart chaceth Ollyphant,
findes Scudamour distrest:
Assayes the house of Busyrane,
where Loues spoyles are exprest.
Canto xii
The maske of Cupid, and th'enchaunted
Chamber are displayd,
Whence Britomart redeemes faire
Amoret, through charmes decayd.
Canto xii, Stanzas 43-7 (from the 1590 edition)
(Numbers in square brackets show the number of stanzas in each canto)
imaginary land, analogous to Britain, where his poem is set)
a favourite of Queen Elizabeth, who granted him, in 1584, a patent
for the exploration and settlement of the Americas.  Later he fell
from her good graces, and after many hardships and adventures was
beheaded by James I.  Probably an exact contemporary of Spenser.
He had a huge estate near Spenser's in southern Ireland, and under
his auspices _FQ_ was published and dedicated to Elizabeth)
Cornwall, under the jurisdiction of the Stannary courts)
Liberata_, 1581)
Aristotle's _Nicomachaean Ethics_; Aristotle himself devises no
such scheme)
name meaning "he who is honoured", "he who is held in respect".
Spenser is referring here to Sir Ector, to whom (in Malory)
Arthur's upbringing was entrusted by Merlin)
married Uther Pendragon, Arthur's father, thirteen days after the
Duke's death)
Ocean's Love to Cynthia_; of this, only one book has survived)
this letter was included)
successfully conclude}
palm-leaf or palm-branch as a token; or: an itinerant monk}
bearing on the allegory)
England and Scotland in 1751, the new year began not on 1 January
but on 25 March)
kept burning by the Vestals, virgin priestesses officiating at the
temple at Rome dedicated to Vesta, goddess of the hearth and
domestic life.  If the flame went out, it was believed that the
state would fall)
out her tongue; hence: the nightingale)
statesman, and a favourite of Queen Elizabeth, who granted him, in
Later he fell from her good graces, and after many hardships and
adventures was beheaded by James I.  Probably an exact contemporary
of Spenser.  He had a huge estate near Spenser's in southern
Ireland, and under his auspices _FQ_ was published, and dedicated
to Elizabeth)
poetry, was published in 1579)
published _Colin Clouts Come Home Again_, dated 27 December 1591)
(Memory); each presides over an area of the arts and sciences and
gives inspiration to its practitioners.  The Muse referred to is
probably Clio, the Muse of History)
of horse-races, etc., a little gold or silver bell was presented as
the prize)
"Januarie", 10)
"Januarie", 55, and "September", 176.  A fellow poet, Harvey
remained a friend of Spenser from their Cambridge days.  Elected a
Fellow of Pembroke Hall in 1570, a year after Spenser was admitted
there as a sizar (undergraduate receiving an allowance from the
college))
parts of nature: the seas, springs, rivers, grottoes, trees,
mountains)
to their destruction)
and trees and suspend the torments of the damned in hell)
victory; hence: fame and glory}
conquerors or poets (cf. "poet laureate"); hence: fame and glory}
Spenser's own are usually subtler than this one)
specifically, here, perhaps, because _FQ_ traces Elizabeth's
lineage back to Aeneas, whose mother was the goddess Venus}
punishment}
Virgil: on whom he is not, incidentally, known to have bestowed the
laurel crown)
one of the Queen's favourites.  Close friend and mentor of Spenser.
Killed in action at Zutphen in the Netherlands)
victory}
sign depicting, for example, a boar's head or crossed keys, and
from this the inn took its name)
government)
Second Punic War)
_Aeneid_)
powerful man in England.  An enemy of the Earl of Leicester, who
was the uncle of Sir Philip Sidney (one of Spenser's friends).
This, taken in combination with Spenser's friendship with Raleigh
(another enemy) perhaps disinclined Burghley to favour the poet or
his work)
of the universe)
son-in-law; poet and literary patron)
offspring; hence: poets)
Northumberland, 1564-1632; a friend of Raleigh)
conquerors or poets)
naval commander)
of 1589, designed to liberate Portugal from the Spanish)
stepson and, in her old age, Elizabeth's favourite)
complete)
music, and leader of the Muses)
parts of nature: the seas, springs, rivers, grottoes, trees,
mountains)
Commander of the Western Fleet, based at Plymouth, which was
credited with defeating the Spanish Armada in 1588)
celebration; scene or act of a medieval mystery play; tableau or
tableaux from such a play.  Spenser never uses his language idly;
and "pageant" is the precise term favoured by C. S. Lewis (see
_Spenser's Images of Life_) to define the form of _FQ_; see also
_SC_, gloss to "June" (_Many Graces_: the passage referred to is at
of Berwick.  First cousin of the Queen and chamberlain of the royal
household)
Stuart to succeed, or supplant, Elizabeth)
Deputy of Ireland from 1580-82; on appointment he made Spenser his
private secretary)
system, held land in return for homage and allegiance to his lord}
and music, and leader of the Muses)
Buckhurst, 1536-1608, an accomplished poet)
named after Zoilus, 400?-320 BC, grammarian and commentator on
Homer)
effectively governed England on the Queen's behalf)
northern Italy)
patron of Virgil and Horace.  He brought Virgil to the attention of
Augustus Caesar)
Netherlands during the Armada campaign)
career
expedition of 1589, in which Norris and Sir Francis Drake, with
over 100 ships and some 20,000 soldiers, were sent to liberate
Portugal from the Spanish)
Elizabeth)
and statesman: one of the Queen's favourites.  Close friend of
Spenser.  Killed in action at Zutphen in the Netherlands)
conquerors or poets)
(1590))
built a composite image of beauty from various sitters)
placed at the end of Volume I)
LO I the man, whose Muse whilome did maske,
Am now enforst a far vnfitter taske,
And sing of Knights and Ladies gentle deeds;
Me, all too meane, the sacred Muse areeds
Fierce warres and faithfull loues shall moralize my song.
Jupiter and Mnemosyne (Memory); each goddess presides over an
area of the arts and sciences and gives inspiration to its
practitioners)
poetry, was published in 1579)
_SC_, "October", 7-8)
heraldic devices or armorial bearings)
Helpe then, {o^} holy Virgin chiefe of nine,
Lay forth out of thine euerlasting scryne
Of Faerie knights and fairest _Tanaquill_,
Sought through the world, and suffered so much ill,
O helpe thou my weake wit, and sharpen my dull tong.
the Muse of history, or Calliope, the Muse of epic poetry;
probably Clio.  Clio is the first of the nine Muses in Hesiod's
_Theogony_, and is usually represented with an open roll of paper
or a chest of books.  Spenser calls her "thou eldest Sister of
the crew" at _TM_ 53.  See also 111.5:6-8, 303.4:6, 706.37:9,
the imaginary land, analogous to Britain, where his poem is set}
Rome (- 577 BC); an exemplary queen, taken as a type for the
Faery Queen.  See 210.76)
for the Faery Queen, see 109.8-15)
And thou most dreaded impe of highest _Ioue_,
At that good knight so cunningly didst roue,
Lay now thy deadly Heben bow apart,
Come both, and with you bring triumphant _Mart_,
After his murdrous spoiles and bloudy rage allayd.
Greeks)
Cupid)
_Diospyros ebenus_, producing hard black wood}
And with them eke, {o^} Goddesse heauenly bright,
Great Lady of the greatest Isle, whose light
Shed thy faire beames into my feeble eyne,
To thinke of that true glorious type of thine,
The which to heare, vouchsafe, {o^} dearest dred a-while.
Elizabeth; the moment of uncertainty smoothly conflates her with
both Venus and the "holy Virgin" of 100.2:1)
elsewhere (e.g. 300.4:8) compared to that of the moon and
(209.4:6) to that of the morning star)
"Januarie", 10)
_The Patron of true Holinesse,
Foule Errour doth defeate:
Hypocrisie him to +entrape+,
Doth to his home entreate._
A Gentle Knight was pricking on the plaine,
Wherein old dints of deepe wounds did remaine,
Yet armes till that time did he neuer wield:
As much disdayning to the curbe to yield:
As one for knightly giusts and fierce encounters fitt.
"noble", "high-born", would be to anticipate the revelation at
unsophisticated)
reading of Book I, in the rarer pejorative senses:_ self-
confident, arrogant, lustful
+But+ on his brest a bloudie Crosse he bore,
For whose sweete sake that glorious badge he wore,
Vpon his shield the like was also scor'd,
Right faithfull true he was in deede and word,
Yet nothing did he dread, but euer was ydrad.
the way to his downfall and ultimate resurrection)_
adored"; see _Rev._ 1.18)
Vpon a great aduenture he was bond,
That greatest Glorious Queene of _Faerie_ lond,
Which of all earthly things he most did craue;
To proue his puissance in battell braue
Vpon his foe, a Dragon horrible and stearne.
A louely Ladie rode him faire beside,
Yet she much whiter, but the same did hide
And ouer all a blacke stole she did throw,
And heauie sat vpon her palfrey slow;
And by her in a line a milke white lambe she lad.
So pure +an innocent+, as that same lambe,
And by descent from Royall lynage came
Their scepters stretcht from East to Westerne shore,
Till that infernall feend with foule vprore
Whom to auenge, she had this Knight from far compeld.
Behind her farre away a Dwarfe did lag,
Or wearied with bearing of her bag
The day with cloudes was suddeine ouercast,
Did poure into his Lemans lap so fast,
And this faire couple eke to shroud themselues were fain.
Enforst to seeke some couert nigh at hand,
That promist ayde the +tempest+ to withstand:
Did spred so broad, that heauens light did hide,
And all within were pathes and alleies wide,
Faire harbour that them seemes; so in they entred arre.
(1) in its modern sense, and (2) in the sense "sexual heat",
"sexual desire".  In combination, these are the undoing of the
knight.  Cf. "iolly" at 101.1:8)
And foorth they passe, with pleasure forward led,
Which therein shrouded from the tempest dred,
Much can they prayse the trees so straight and hy,
The vine-prop Elme, the Poplar neuer dry,
The Aspine good for staues, the Cypresse funerall.
for sailing-ships)
The Laurell, meed of mightie Conquerours
The Willow worne of forlorne Paramours,
The Birch for shaftes, the Sallow for the mill,
The warlike Beech, the Ash for nothing ill,
The caruer Holme, the Maple +seeldom+ inward sound.
crown for conquerors or poets)
by water)
myrrha_) is used herbally as an antiseptic and disinfectant.  But
the reference also evokes (noted by Bayley (1966) 264-5) the
story of Myrrha (_Met._ 10), whose incestuous desire for her own
father led to her transformation into a myrrh tree: in that form
she gave agonizing birth to Adonis.  In _Song Sol._ 1.13, myrrh
is mentioned in a celebration of sexual congress.  The word
"myrrh" itself is derived from an Arabic word meaning "bitter".
Here in one line is a perfect example of the richness of
Spenser's art)
beech)
carving)
Led with delight, they thus beguile the way,
When weening to returne, whence they did stray,
But wander too and fro in wayes vnknowne,
That makes them doubt, their wits be not their owne:
That which of them to take, in diuerse doubt they been.
At last resoluing forward still to fare,
That path they take, that beaten seemd most bare,
Which when by tract they hunted had throughout,
Amid the thickest woods.  The Champion stout
And to the Dwarfe a while his needlesse spere he gaue.
indicated by the tautology; cf. 109.33:2, 308.37:5, but also
sword being used when he is on foot)
Be well aware, quoth then that Ladie milde,
The danger hid, the place vnknowne and wilde,
And perill without show: therefore +your stroke+
Ah Ladie (said he) shame were to reuoke
Vertue giues her selfe light, through darkenesse for to wade.
resistance}
Yea but (quoth she) the perill of this place
To wish you backe returne with foule disgrace,
To stay the steppe, ere forced to retrate.
A monster vile, whom God and man does hate:
The fearfull Dwarfe:) this is no place for liuing men.
knight's spiritual quest)
also "stray", "deviate", "be mistaken")
But full of fire and greedy hardiment,
But forth vnto the darksome hole he went,
A litle glooming light, much like a shade,
Halfe like a serpent horribly displaide,
Most lothsom, filthie, foule, and full of vile disdaine.
And as she lay vpon the durtie ground,
Yet was in knots and many boughtes vpwound,
A thousand yong ones, which she dayly fed,
Of sundry +shapes,+ yet all ill fauored:
Into her mouth they crept, and suddain all were gone.
Their dam vpstart, out of her den effraide,
About her cursed head, whose folds displaid
She lookt about, and seeing one in mayle
For light she hated as the deadly bale,
Where plaine none might her see, nor she see any plaine.
usage:_ great consuming fire, funeral pyre; _hence, perhaps:_
hell-fire
Which when the valiant Elfe +perceiu'd+, he lept
And with his trenchand blade her boldly kept
Therewith enrag'd she loudly gan to bray,
Threatning her angry sting, him to dismay:
The stroke down from her head vnto her shoulder glaunst.
Much daunted with that dint, her sence was dazd,
And all attonce her beastly body raizd
Tho wrapping vp her wrethed sterne arownd,
All suddenly about his body wound,
God helpe the man so wrapt in _Errours_ endlesse traine.
His Lady sad to see his sore constraint,
Add faith vnto your force, and be not faint:
That when he heard, in great perplexitie,
And knitting all his force got one hand free,
That soone to loose her wicked bands did her constraine.
Therewith she spewd out of her filthy maw
Full of great lumpes of flesh and gobbets raw,
His grasping hold, and from her turne him backe:
With loathly frogs and toades, which eyes did lacke,
Her filthy parbreake all the place defiled has.
As when old father _Nilus_ gins to swell
His fattie waues do fertile slime outwell,
But when his later +spring+ gins to auale,
Ten thousand kindes of creatures, partly male
Such vgly monstrous shapes elswhere may no man reed.
tumescence, sexual excitement}
The same so sore annoyed has the knight,
His forces faile, ne can no longer fight.
She poured forth out of her hellish sinke
Deformed monsters, fowle, and black as inke,
And him encombred sore, but could not hurt at all.
As gentle Shepheard in sweete euen-tide,
High on an hill, his flocke to vewen wide,
A cloud of +combrous+ gnattes do him molest,
That from their noyance he no where can rest,
He brusheth +oft+, and oft doth mar their murmurings.
Thus ill bestedd, and fearefull more of shame,
Halfe furious vnto his foe he came,
Or soone to lose, before he once would lin;
That from her body full of filthie sin
A streame of cole black bloud forth gushed from her corse.
bestad: badly beset, badly hemmed in (SUS)
Her scattred brood, soone as their Parent deare
Groning full deadly, all with troublous feare,
Weening their wonted entrance to haue found
They flocked all about her bleeding +wound,+
Making her death their life, and eke her hurt their good.
That detestable sight him much amazde,
Deuoure their dam; on whom while so he gazd,
Their bellies swolne he saw with fulnesse burst,
Of such as drunke her life, the which them nurst;
His foes haue slaine themselues, with whom he should contend.
His Ladie seeing all, that chaunst, from farre
And said, Faire knight, borne vnder happy starre,
Well worthy be you of that Armorie,
And proou'd your strength on a strong enimie,
And henceforth euer wish, that like succeed it may.
Then mounted he vpon his Steede againe,
That path he kept, which beaten was most plaine,
But still did follow one vnto the end,
So forward on his way (with God to frend)
Long way he trauelled, before he heard of ought.
At length they chaunst to meet vpon the way
His feete all bare, his beard all hoarie gray,
Sober he seemde, and very sagely sad,
Simple in shew, and voyde of malice bad,
And often knockt his brest, as one that did repent.
He faire the knight saluted, louting low,
And after asked him, if he did know
Ah my deare Sonne (quoth he) how should, alas,
Bidding his beades all day for his trespas,
With holy father +sits+ not with such things to mell.
reuerence": _SC_, gloss to "Julye")
hermit}
But if of daunger which hereby doth dwell,
Of a straunge man I can you tidings tell,
Of such (said he) I chiefly do inquere,
In which that wicked wight his dayes doth weare:
That such a cursed creature liues so long a space.
but also 107.48:9_
Far hence (quoth he) in wastfull wildernesse
May euer passe, but thorough great distresse.
And well I wote, that of your later fight
But wanting rest will also want of might?
At night doth baite his steedes the _Ocean_ waues emong.
Then with the Sunne take Sir, your timely rest,
Vntroubled night they say giues counsell best.
(Quoth then that aged man;) the way to win
Therefore with me ye may take vp your In
So with that godly father to his home they went.
A little lowly Hermitage it was,
Far from resort of people, that did pas
There was an holy Chappell edifyde,
His holy things each morne and euentyde:
Which from a sacred fountaine welled forth alway.
Arriued there, the little house they fill,
Rest is their feast, and all things at their will;
With faire discourse the euening so they pas:
And well could file his tongue as smooth as glas;
He strowd an _Aue-Mary_ after and before.
The drouping Night thus creepeth on them fast,
As messenger of _Morpheus_ on them cast
Vnto their lodgings then his guestes he riddes:
He to his study goes, and there amiddes
He seekes out mighty charmes, to trouble sleepy mindes.
sleep.  His name signifies "Fashioner", "Moulder", because he
shapes the sleeper's dreams)
_Julius Caesar_ II i 230)
Then choosing out few wordes most horrible,
With which and other spelles like terrible,
And cursed heauen, and spake reprochfull shame
A bold bad man, that dar'd to call by name
At which _Cocytus_ quakes, and _Styx_ is put to flight.
husband of Proserpine)
Jupiter; she was abducted by Pluto and taken to the lower world)
underworld (_DGDG_ 1.1): see also 105.22:5, 402.47:7)
the others are Acheron, Phlegethon, Lethe, and Styx)
And forth he cald out of deepe darknesse dred
Fluttring about his euer damned hed,
To aide his friends, or fray his enimies:
And fittest for to forge true-seeming lyes;
The other by him selfe staide other worke to doo.
He making speedy way through spersed ayre,
To _Morpheus_ house doth hastily repaire.
And low, where dawning day doth neuer peepe,
Doth euer wash, and _Cynthia_ still doth steepe
Whiles sad Night ouer him her mantle black doth spred.
itself.  See 203.31:2)
Whose double gates he findeth locked fast,
The other all with siluer ouercast;
Watching to banish Care their enimy,
By them the Sprite doth passe in quietly,
In drowsie fit he findes: of nothing he takes keepe.
dreams pass through the gate of ivory)
And more, to lulle him in his slumber soft,
And euer-drizling raine vpon the loft,
Of swarming Bees, did cast him in a swowne:
As still are wont t'annoy the walled towne,
Wrapt in eternall silence farre from enemyes.
The messenger approching to him spake,
So sound he slept, that nought mought him awake.
Whereat he gan to stretch: but he againe
As one then in a dreame, whose dryer braine
He mumbled soft, but would not all his silence breake.
The Sprite then gan more boldly him to wake,
Of _Hecate_: whereat he gan to quake,
Halfe angry asked him, for what he came.
He that the stubborne Sprites can wisely tame,
A fit false dreame, that can delude the sleepers sent.
attendant upon Proserpine, associated with witchcraft and dreams;
sometimes identified with Proserpine herself.  See _Myth._ 3.15,
_Macbeth_ II i 52, III v, IV i 39-43, _King Lear_ I i 109)
The God obayde, and calling forth straight way
Deliuered it to him, and downe did lay
Whose sences all were straight benumbd and starke.
Remounted vp as light as chearefull Larke,
In hast vnto his Lord, where he him left afore.
Who all this while with charmes and hidden artes,
And fram'd of liquid ayre her tender partes
That weaker sence it could haue rauisht quight:
Was nigh beguiled with so goodly sight:
Cast a black stole, most like to seeme for _Vna_ fit.
Now when that ydle dreame was to him brought,
Where he slept soundly void of euill thought,
In sort as he him schooled priuily:
Full of the makers guile, with +vsage+ sly
Whose semblance she did carrie vnder feigned hew.
Thus well instructed, to their worke they hast,
The one vpon his hardy head him plast,
That nigh his manly hart did melt away,
Then seemed him his Lady by him lay,
Her chast hart had subdewd, to learne Dame +Pleasures+ toy.
courage
_seduco_ and hence "seduce")
toy = amorous game)
And she her selfe of beautie soueraigne Queene,
Her, whom he waking euermore did +weene,+
On earthly braunch, the daughter of a king,
And eke the _Graces_ seemed all to sing,
Whilst freshest _Flora_ her +with+ Yuie girlond crownd.
ambiguous)
handmaids of Venus.  They are especially associated with poetry.
See 203.25, 610.9, 610.21-4)
the god of marriage, or the song itself; _i{o"}_ = an interjection,
as "hurrah!")
famous harlot, which, with the abuse of her body hauing gotten
great riches, made the people of Rome her heyre": _SC_, gloss to
"March")
In this great passion of vnwonted lust,
He +started+ vp, as seeming to +mistrust,+
Lo there before his face his Lady is,
And as halfe blushing offred him to kis,
Most like that virgin true, which for her knight him took.
All cleane dismayd to see so vncouth sight,
He thought +haue+ slaine her in his fierce despight:
He stayde his hand, and gan himselfe aduise
Wringing her hands in +wemens+ pitteous wise,
Both for her noble bloud, and for her tender youth.
And said, Ah Sir, my liege Lord and my loue,
And mightie causes wrought in heauen aboue,
For hoped loue to winne me certaine hate?
Die is my dew: yet rew my wretched state
Hath made iudge of my life or death indifferently.
whom one owes feudal allegiance and service}
they hit; he is often depicted wearing a blindfold.  See e.g.
Your owne deare sake forst me at first to leaue
Her swollen hart her speach seemd to bereaue,
Captiu'd to fortune and frayle worldly feares,
Let me not dye in languor and long teares.
What frayes ye, that were wont to comfort me affrayd?
Loue of your selfe, she said, and deare constraint
In secret anguish and vnpittied plaint,
Her doubtfull words made that redoubted knight
Her fawning loue with foule disdainefull spight
That for my sake vnknowne such griefe vnto you grew.
her, has not been fully proven)
Assure your selfe, it fell not all to ground;
I deeme your loue, and hold me to you bound;
Where cause is none, but to your rest depart.
Her mournefull plaintes, beguiled of her art,
So slyding softly forth, she turnd as to her ease.
Long after lay he musing at her mood,
For whose defence he was to shed his blood.
Hauing yrockt a sleepe his irkesome spright,
With bowres, and beds, and Ladies deare delight:
With that misformed spright he backe returnd againe.
(from Greek _misos_, hatred, grudge), generally denotes "evilly",
"with bad intention", etc.}
The Redcrosse Knight from Truth:
And workes him wofull ruth._
BY this the Northerne wagoner had set
That was in Ocean waues yet neuer wet,
To all, that in the wide deepe wandring arre:
Had warned once, that _Ph{oe}bus_ fiery carre
Full enuious that night so long his roome did fill.
for "ploughman"), also called the Bear Driver, or Herdsman; it
lies to the south and east of Ursa Major)
Plow, Wain, or, in Britain, the Wagon); they point to Polaris)
the Fox_ (see Martin, 1882-7) and Chaucer's _The Nun's Priest's
Tale_; see also _As You Like It_ II vii 30)
When those accursed messengers of hell,
Came to their wicked maister, and gan tell
Who all in rage to see his skilfull might
And sad _Proserpines_ wrath, them to affright.
He cast about, and searcht his balefull bookes againe.
to be his consort in the underworld; the queen of hell)
Eftsoones he tooke that miscreated faire,
A seeming body of the subtile aire,
His wanton dayes that euer loosely led,
Those two he tooke, and in a secret bed,
Them both together laid, to ioy in vaine delight.
that in loves and lustihood His wanton days ever loosely led)
unfavourably, to deem evil}
unavailing, insubstantial
Forthwith he runnes with feigned faithfull hast
And dreames, gan now to take more sound repast,
As one aghast with feends or damned sprights,
That here wex old in sleepe, whiles wicked wights
Come see, where your false Lady doth her honour staine.
All in amaze he suddenly vp start
Who soone him brought into a secret part,
In wanton lust and lewd embracement:
The eye of reason was with rage yblent,
But hardly was restreined of that aged sire.
eagerness
_hence:_ rendered turbid, defiled
Returning to his bed in torment great,
He could not rest, but did his stout heart eat,
Yrkesome of life, and too long lingring night.
Had spent his lampe, and brought forth dawning light,
The Dwarfe him brought his steed: so both away do fly.
star; Venus is also the morning star)
Now when the rosy-fingred Morning faire,
Had spred her purple robe through deawy aire,
The royall virgin shooke off drowsy-hed,
Lookt for her knight, who far away was fled,
Then gan she waile and weepe, to see that woefull stowre.
Aurora's prayers the gods bestowed immortality on Tithonus, but
she forgot to pray for his perpetual youth, so that he was doomed
to eternal old age.  Eventually she shut him up in his chamber
and turned him into a cicada)
And after him she rode with so much speede
For him so far had borne his light-foot steede,
That him to follow was but fruitlesse paine;
But euery hill and dale, each wood and plaine
He so vngently left her, whom she +loued+ best.
frequently symbolizes its rider's mood or nature: see, for
example, 102.13:7)
But subtill _Archimago_, when his guests
And _Vna_ wandring in woods and forrests,
That had such might ouer true meaning harts;
How he may worke vnto her further smarts:
And in her many troubles did most pleasure take.
He then deuisde himselfe how to disguise;
As many formes and shapes in seeming wise,
Sometime a fowle, sometime a fish in lake,
That of himselfe he oft for feare would quake,
The hidden power of herbes, and might of Magicke spell?
or form when trying to evade questioners)
But now seemde best, the person to put on
In mighty armes he was yclad +anon,+
A bloudy crosse, and on his crauen crest
Full iolly knight he seemde, and well addrest,
_Saint George_ himselfe ye would haue deemed him to be.
But he the knight, whose semblaunt he did beare,
Still flying from his thoughts and gealous feare;
At last him chaunst to meete vpon the way
In whose great shield was writ with letters gay
He was, and cared not for God or man a point.
He had a faire companion of his way,
Purfled with gold and pearle of rich assay,
She wore, with crownes and owches garnished,
Her wanton palfrey all was ouerspred
Whose bridle rung with golden bels and bosses braue.
see _Rev._ 17.4; and _Isa._ 1.18}
pearls, etc.}
episcopal office or dignity)
thread}
With faire disport and courting dalliaunce
But when she saw the knight his speare aduaunce,
And bad her knight addresse him to the fray:
And hope to winne his Ladies heart that day,
The red bloud trickling staind the way, as he did ride.
(including the sense of "diverting from the true path")
The knight of the _Redcrosse_ when him he spide,
Gan fairely couch his speare, and towards ride:
That daunted with their forces hideous,
And eke themselues too rudely rigorous,
Do backe rebut, and each to other yeeldeth land.
As when two rams stird with ambitious pride,
Their horned fronts so fierce on either side
Astonied both, stand sencelesse as a blocke,
So stood these twaine, vnmoued as a rocke,
The broken reliques of their former cruelty.
The _Sarazin_ sore daunted with the buffe
Who well it wards, and quyteth cuff with cuff:
And through their iron sides with +cruell spies+
No foote to foe.  The flashing fier flies
And streames of purple bloud new +dies+ the verdant fields.
Curse on that Crosse (quoth then the _Sarazin_)
Dead long ygoe I wote thou haddest bin,
But yet I warne thee now assured sitt,
With rigour so outrageous he smitt,
And glauncing downe his shield, from blame him fairely blest.
the code of chivalry)
completely
Who thereat wondrous wroth, the sleeping spark
And at his haughtie helmet making mark,
And cleft his head.  He tumbling downe aliue,
Greeting his graue: his grudging ghost did striue
Whither the soules do fly of men, that liue amis.
The Lady when she saw her champion fall,
Staid not to waile his woefull funerall,
Who after her as hastily gan scowre,
The _Sarazins_ shield, signe of the conqueroure.
For present cause was none of dread her to dismay.
She turning backe with ruefull countenaunce,
On silly Dame, subiect to hard mischaunce,
In so ritch weedes and seeming glorious show,
And said, Deare dame, your suddein ouerthrow
And tell, both who ye be, and who that tooke your part.
Melting in teares, then gan she thus lament;
Hath now made thrall to your commandement,
And fortune false betraide me to +your+ powre,
Borne the sole daughter of an Emperour,
And high hath set his throne, where _Tiberis_ doth pas.
He in the first flowre of my freshest age,
Of a most mighty king, most rich and sage;
Was neuer Prince so meeke and debonaire;
My dearest Lord fell from high honours staire,
And cruelly was slaine, that shall I euer mone.
His blessed body spoild of liuely breath,
And fro me hid: of whose most innocent death
O how great sorrow my sad soule assaid.
And many yeares throughout the world I straid,
With loue, long time did languish as the striken hind.
literally burned for the love of Aeneas)
At last it chaunced this proud +_Sarazin_,+
With him away, but yet could neuer win
There lies he now with foule dishonour dead,
The eldest of three brethren, all three bred
And twixt them both was borne the bloudy bold _Sans loy_.
In this sad plight, friendlesse, vnfortunate,
Crauing of you in pitty of my state,
He in great passion all this while did dwell,
Then his dull eares, to heare what she did tell;
The vndeserued woes and sorrowes, which ye shew.
Henceforth in safe assuraunce may ye rest,
And lost an old foe, that did you molest:
With chaunge of cheare the seeming simple maid
And yeelding soft, in that she nought gain-said,
And she coy lookes: +so dainty+ they say maketh derth.
Applied to food, dearth = scarceness; dainty = choice, delicious.
And, generally: dearth = dearness, rarity; dainty = delightful.
In either event this is a restatement of the Latin proverb,
_quae rara, cara_: what is scarce is esteemed or becomes
estimable.  In other words, her very coyness serves to increase
his desire)
Long time they thus together traueiled,
Where grew two goodly trees, that faire did spred
And their greene leaues trembling with euery blast,
The fearefull Shepheard often there aghast
His mery oaten pipe, but shund th'vnlucky ground.
But this good knight soone as he them can spie,
For golden _Ph{oe}bus_ now +ymounted+ hie,
Hurled his beame so scorching cruell hot,
And his new Lady it endured not.
From the fierce heat, and rest their weary limbs a tide.
Faire seemly pleasaunce each to other makes,
And in his falsed fancy he her takes
Which to expresse, he bends his gentle wit,
A girlond for her dainty forehead fit,
Small drops of gory bloud, that trickled downe the same.
Old English:_ puts in bonds; _hence:_ constrains, confines
Therewith a piteous yelling voyce was heard,
My tender sides in this rough rynd embard,
Least to you hap, that happened to me heare,
O too deare loue, loue bought with death too deare.
And with that suddein horror could no member moue.
At last whenas the dreadfull passion
Yet musing at the straunge occasion,
What voyce of damned Ghost from _Limbo_ lake,
Both which fraile men do oftentimes mistake,
And ruefull plaints, me bidding +guiltlesse+ bloud to spare?
_occasio_), because this is a chance for him to learn the true
nature of his companion}
hell where the unbaptized are confined; "lake" comes to us via
Latin from the Greek _lakkos_, = pit, hollow, hole (filled with
water or not))
editors, though this sense is not mentioned in _OED_)
Then groning deepe, Nor damned Ghost, (quoth he,)
But once a man _Fradubio_, now a tree,
A cruell witch her cursed will to wreake,
Where _Boreas_ doth blow full bitter bleake,
For though a tree I seeme, yet cold and heat me paines.
Say on _Fradubio_ then, or man, or tree,
Art thou misshaped thus, as now I see?
But double griefs afflict concealing harts,
The author then (said he) of all my smarts,
That many errant knights hath brought to wretchednesse.
the word-order here also implies the sense of erring, deviating,
etc.)
In prime of youthly yeares, when corage hot
First kindled in my brest, it was my lot
Now not a Lady, but a seeming tree;
Me chaunced of a knight encountred bee,
Like a faire Lady, but did fowle _Duessa_ hyde.
Whose forged beauty he did take in hand,
I in defence of mine did likewise stand,
So both to battell fierce arraunged arre,
Vnder my speare: such is the dye of warre:
Did yield her comely person, to be at my call.
So doubly lou'd of Ladies vnlike faire,
One day in doubt I cast for to compare,
A Rosy girlond was the victors meede:
So hard the discord was to be agreede.
And euer false _Duessa_ seemde as faire as shee.
both meanings are probably intended.  Cf. 304.54:9)
The wicked witch now seeing all this while
What not by right, she cast to win by guile,
A foggy mist, that ouercast the day,
Dimmed her former beauties shining ray,
Then was she faire alone, when none was faire in place.
reality of her beauty)
Then cride she out, +fye+, fye, deformed wight,
To haue before bewitched all mens sight;
Her loathly visage viewing with disdaine,
And would haue kild her; but with faigned paine,
So left her, where she now is turnd to treen mould.
like)
+Thens+ forth I tooke _Duessa_ for my Dame,
Ne euer wist, but that she was the same,
When Witches wont do penance for their crime)
Bathing her selfe in origane and thyme:
That euer to haue toucht her, I did deadly rew.
thyme was also used to treat syphilis)
Her neather partes misshapen, monstruous,
But they did seeme more foule and hideous,
+Thens+ forth from her most beastly companie
Soon as appeard safe +opportunitie+:
I saw before mine eyes, if I were knowne to stray.
The diuelish hag by chaunges of my cheare
With wicked herbes and ointments did besmeare
That all my senses were bereaued quight:
And by my wretched louers side me pight,
Banisht from liuing wights, our wearie dayes we waste.
But how long time, said then the Elfin knight,
We may not chaunge (quoth he) this euil plight,
That is the terme prescribed by the spell.
That may restore you to your wonted well?
Shall vs restore, none else from hence may vs vnbynd.
The false _Duessa_, now _Fidessa_ hight,
And knew well all was true.  But the good knight
When all this speech the liuing tree had spent,
That from the bloud he might be innocent,
Then turning to his Lady, dead with feare her found.
Her seeming dead he found with feigned feare,
And paynd himselfe with busie care to reare
And dimmed sight with pale and deadly hew
Her vp he tooke, too simple and too trew,
He set her on her steede, and forward forth did beare.
care
"free from duplicity"; she is then _too_ simple and _too_ true)
_Forsaken Truth long seekes her loue,
Marres blind Deuotions mart, and fals
NOught is there vnder heau'ns wide hollownesse,
Then beautie brought t'vnworthy wretchednesse
I, whether lately through her brightnesse blind,
Which I do owe vnto all woman kind,
When such I see, that all for pittie I could die.
And now it is empassioned so deepe,
That my fraile eyes these lines with teares do steepe,
Though true as touch, though daughter of a king,
Though nor in word nor deede ill meriting,
And her due loues deriu'd to that vile witches share.
quality of gold)
Yet she most faithfull Ladie all this while
Farre from all peoples prease, as in exile,
To seeke her knight; who subtilly betrayd
Had her abandond.  She of nought affrayd,
Yet wished tydings none of him vnto her brought.
parenthesized))
One day nigh wearie of the yrkesome way,
And on the grasse her daintie limbes did lay
From her faire head her fillet she vndight,
As the great eye of heauen shyned bright,
Did neuer mortall eye behold such heauenly grace.
cf. 101.4:4}
It fortuned out of the thickest wood
Hunting full greedie after saluage blood;
With gaping mouth at her ran greedily,
But to the pray when as he drew more ny,
And with the sight amazd, forgat his furious forse.
In stead thereof he kist her wearie feet,
As he her wronged innocence did weet.
And simple truth subdue auenging wrong?
Still dreading death, when she had marked long,
And drizling teares did shed for pure affection.
The Lyon Lord of euerie beast in +field+
And mightie proud to humble weake does yield,
Him prickt, in pittie of my sad estate:
How does he find in cruell hart to hate
As the God of my life? why hath he me abhord?
Redounding teares did choke th'end of her plaint,
And sad to see her sorrowfull constraint
With pittie calmd, downe fell his angry mood.
Arose the virgin borne of heauenly brood,
To seeke her strayed Champion, if she might attaine.
The Lyon would not leaue her desolate,
Of her chast person, and a faithfull mate
Still when she slept, he kept both watch and ward,
With humble seruice to her will prepard:
And euer by her lookes conceiued her intent.
Long she thus traueiled through deserts wyde,
Yet neuer shew of liuing wight espyde;
In which the tract of peoples footing was,
The same she followes, till at last she has
That on her shoulders sad a pot of water bore.
+To whom+ approching she to her gan call,
But the rude wench her answer'd nought at all,
Till seeing by her side the Lyon stand,
And fled away: for neuer in that land
And that dread Lyons looke her cast in deadly hew.
Full fast she fled, ne euer lookt behynd,
And home she came, whereas her mother blynd
But suddaine catching hold, did her dismay
Who full of ghastly fright and cold affray,
Dame _Vna_, wearie Dame, and entrance did requere.
Which when none yeelded, her vnruly Page
And let her in; where of his cruell rage
She found them both in darkesome corner pent;
Vpon her beades deuoutly penitent;
And thrise nine hundred _Aues_ she was wont to say.
noster_ = our father)
And to augment her painefull pennance more,
And next her wrinkled skin rough sackcloth wore,
But now for feare her beads she did forget.
Faire _Vna_ framed words and count'nance fit:
That in their cotage small, that night she rest her may.
The day is spent, and commeth drowsie night,
Sad _Vna_ downe her laies in wearie plight,
In stead of rest, she does lament, and weepe
And sighes, and grones, and euermore does steepe
All night she thinks too long, and often lookes for light.
Now when _Aldeboran_ was mounted hie
And all in deadly sleepe did drowned lie,
He knocked fast, and often curst, and sware,
For on his backe a heauy load he bare
Which he had got abroad by purchase criminall.
constellation of Taurus; in the northern hemisphere, in this
relationship to Cassiopeia the season would be winter, the time
of greatest darkness and cold)
throne.  Cassiopeia was a proud queen who consented to the
sacrifice of her virgin daughter, Andromeda, to a sea-monster.
Andromeda, however, was rescued by Perseus, who subsequently
married her and was declared the saviour of the royal house;
Cassiopeia and her throne were placed among the stars (see _Met._
the story of Una and the Redcross Knight)
He was to weete a stout and sturdie thiefe,
And poore mens boxes of their due reliefe,
The holy Saints of their rich vestiments
And spoild the Priests of their habiliments,
Then he by cunning sleights in at the window crept.
And all that he by right or wrong could find,
Vpon the daughter of this woman blind,
With whom he whoredome vsd, that few did know,
And plentie, which in all the land did grow;
And now he to her brought part of his stolen things.
church)
unfaithfulness to the true God)
Thus long the dore with rage and threats he bet,
The Lyon frayed them, him in to let:
But open breakes the dore in furious wize,
Encountring fierce, him suddaine doth surprize,
Vnder his Lordly foot him proudly hath supprest.
Him booteth not resist, nor succour call,
Who streight him rent in thousand peeces small,
Drunke vp his life; his corse left on the strand.
Ne dare to weepe, nor seeme to vnderstand
Affraid, least to themselues the like mishappen might.
Now when broad day the world discouered has,
And on their former iourney forward pas,
With paines farre passing that long wandring _Greeke_,
Such were the labours of this Lady meeke,
Then furthest from her hope, when most she weened nie.
rejected the immortality offered him by Calypso (_Odyssey_ 5))
Soone as she parted thence, the fearefull twaine,
Came forth, and finding _Kirkrapine_ there slaine,
And beat their brests, and naked flesh to teare.
Then forth they ranne like two amazed deare,
To follow her, that was the causer of their ill.
Whom ouertaking, they gan loudly bray,
Shamefully at her rayling all the way,
That was the flowre of faith and chastity;
That plagues, and mischiefs, and long misery
And that in endlesse error she might euer stray.
But when she saw her prayers nought preuaile,
And in the way as she did weepe and waile,
Yet knight was not for all his bragging bost,
By traynes into new troubles to haue tost:
If that of such a Ladie she could tellen ought.
Therewith she gan her passion to renew,
Saying, that harlot she too lately knew,
And so forth told the story of her feare:
And after for that Ladie did +inquire+;
His faire enchaunted steed, and eke his charmed launce.
Ere long he came, where _Vna_ traueild slow,
Whom seeing such, for dread he durst not show
Vnto an hill; from whence when she him spyde,
She weend it was, and towards him gan ryde:
And with faire fearefull humblesse towards him shee came.
And weeping said, Ah my long lacked Lord,
Much feared I to haue bene quite abhord,
That should as death vnto my deare hart light:
My chearefull day is turnd to chearelesse night,
But welcome now my light, and shining lampe of blis.
He thereto meeting said, My dearest Dame,
To thinke that knighthood I so much should shame,
And chose in Faery court of meere goodwill,
The earth shall sooner leaue her kindly skill
Then I leaue you, my liefe, yborne of heauenly berth.
And sooth to say, why I left you so long,
Where _Archimago_ said a felon strong
But knight he now shall neuer more deface:
Well to accept, and euermore embrace
Haue vowd you to defend, now then your plaint appease.
His louely words her seemd due recompence
For many yeares of sorrow can dispence:
She has forgot, how many a wofull stowre
Of past: true is, that true loue hath no powre
Before her stands her knight, for whom she toyld so sore.
Much like, as when the beaten marinere,
Oft soust in swelling _Tethys_ saltish teare,
With blustring breath of heauen, that none can bide,
Soone as the port from farre he has espide,
And _Nereus_ crownes with cups; his mates him pledg around.
Orion's two hounds; Orion is the giant hunter battling Taurus: cf.
during the "dog days" of July and August, "at which time the Dogge
starre, which is called Syrius, or Canicula, reigneth with
immoderate heate, causing pestilence, drougth, and many diseases"
(_SC_, gloss to "Julye"))
Such ioy made _Vna_, when her knight she found;
Then the glad marchant, that does vew from ground
He hurles out vowes, and _Neptune_ oft doth blesse:
Discoursing of her dreadfull late distresse,
Who +told+ +her all that+ fell in iourney as she went.
They had not ridden farre, when they might see
Full strongly armd, and on a courser free,
And the sharpe yron did for anger eat,
His looke was sterne, and seemed still to threat
And on his shield _Sans loy_ in bloudie lines was dyde.
When nigh he drew vnto this gentle payre
He burnt in fire, and gan eftsoones prepare
Loth was that other, and did faint through +feare+,
But yet his Lady did so well him cheare,
So bent his speare, and +spurnd+ his horse with yron heele.
Archimago, that other Knight of the Redcross)
But that proud Paynim forward came so +fierce+,
Through vainely crossed shield he quite did +pierce,+
Through shield and bodie eke he should him beare:
That from his saddle quite he did him beare:
And from his gored wound a well of bloud did gush.
down, to ground did rush; (2) He, tumbling rudely, down to ground
did rush)
Dismounting lightly from his loftie steed,
And proudly said, Lo there the worthie meed
Henceforth his ghost freed from repining strife,
When +morning+ altars purgd with enemies life,
Life from _Sansfoy_ thou tookst, _Sansloy_ shall from thee take.
their former life and become purified; see _SC_, gloss to "March",
_Aen._ 6.745-51, _PL_ 2.604)
goddesses who guard the gates of hell; in earlier accounts, they
are avenging deities, of indeterminate number, sent from hell to
punish wrongdoers)
Therewith in haste his helmet gan vnlace,
Deare Sir, what euer that thou be in place:
Now at thy mercy: Mercie not withstand:
Though conquered now he lie on lowly land,
In bloudie field: therefore of life him not depriue.
Her piteous words might not abate his rage,
Haue slaine him straight: but when he sees his age,
His hastie hand he doth amazed hold,
For +the+ old man well knew he, though vntold,
Ne euer wont in field, ne in round lists to fight.
enclosing the tilting-ground)
And said, Why _Archimago_, lucklesse syre,
That hath thee hither brought to taste mine yre?
In stead of foe to wound my friend amis?
And on those guilefull dazed eyes of his
He left him lying so, ne would no lenger stay.
But to the virgin comes, who all this while
By him, who has the guerdon of his guile,
Yet is she now in more perplexitie,
From whom her booteth not at all to flie;
Her from her Palfrey pluckt, her visage to behold.
But her fierce seruant full of kingly awe
So rudely handled by her foe he sawe,
And ramping on his shield, did weene the same
But he was stout, and lust did now inflame
He hath his shield redeem'd, and +foorth+ his +swerd+ he drawes.
O then too weake and feeble was the forse
For he was strong, and of so mightie corse,
And feates of armes did wisely vnderstand.
With thrilling point of deadly yron brand,
He roar'd aloud, whiles life forsooke his stubborne brest.
Who now is left to keepe the forlorne maid
Her faithfull gard remou'd, her hope dismaid,
He now Lord of the +field+, his pride to fill,
Her vildly entertaines, and will or nill,
Her prayers nought preuaile, his rage is more of might.
And all the way, with great lamenting paine,
That stony hart could riuen haue in twaine,
But he enrag'd with rancor, nothing heares.
But followes her farre off, ne ought he feares,
More mild in beastly kind, then that her beastly foe.
_To sinfull house of Pride, Duessa
Where brothers death to wreak Sansioy
YOung knight, what euer that dost armes professe,
Beware of fraud, beware of ficklenesse,
Least thou of her beleeue too lightly blame,
For vnto knight there is no greater shame,
That doth this _Redcrosse_ knights ensample plainly proue.
Who after that he had faire _Vna_ lorne,
And false _Duessa_ in her sted had borne,
Long with her traueild, till at last they see
The house of mightie Prince it seemd to bee:
All bare through peoples feet, which thither traueiled.
Great troupes of people traueild thitherward
But few returned, hauing scaped hard,
Which euer after in most wretched case,
Thither _Duessa_ bad him bend his pace:
And also nigh consumed is the lingring day.
from the true path")
A stately Pallace built of squared bricke,
Whose wals were high, but nothing strong, nor thick,
That purest skye with brightnesse they dismaid:
And goodly galleries farre ouer laid,
And on the top a Diall told the timely howres.
It was a goodly heape for to behould,
But full great pittie, that so faire a mould
For on a sandie hill, that still did flit,
That euery breath of heauen shaked it:
Were ruinous and old, but painted cunningly.
Arriued there they passed in forth right;
Yet charge of them was to a Porter hight
Thence to the hall, which was on euery side
Infinite sorts of people did abide
Of her, that was the Lady of that Pallace bright.
By them they passe, all gazing on them round,
Their frayle amazed senses did confound:
Such endlesse richesse, and so sumptuous shew;
Like euer saw.  And there a noble crew
Which with their presence faire, the place much beautifide.
High aboue all a cloth of State was spred,
On which there sate most braue embellished
A mayden Queene, that shone as _Titans_ ray,
Yet her bright blazing beautie did assay
As enuying her selfe, that too exceeding shone.
throne}
throne; the intention is not entirely clear)
to mind the Titans, who sought to dethrone Zeus (Jove); they are
synonymous with rebellion and the overthrow of order.  And the
phrase "_Titans_ ray" prepares the reader for a description of
Phaethon in the next stanza)
Exceeding shone, like _Ph{oe}bus_ fairest childe,
And flaming mouthes of steedes vnwonted wilde
Proud of such glory and aduancement vaine,
He leaues the welkin way most beaten plaine,
With fire not made to burne, but fairely for to shyne.
who took his father's chariot and set the world on fire: killed
by Jupiter with a thunderbolt.  See 311.38, _Met._ 2.1 ff.)
handling of the reins)
the sky}
So proud she shyned in her Princely state,
And sitting high; for lowly she did hate:
A dreadfull Dragon with an hideous trayne,
Wherein her face she often vewed fayne,
For she was wondrous faire, as any liuing wight.
lowly}
Of griesly _Pluto_ she the daughter was,
Yet did she thinke her pearelesse +worth+ to pas
And thundring _Ioue_, that high in heauen doth dwell,
Or if that any else did _Ioue_ excell:
Or if ought higher were then that, did it desyre.
Phaethon with a bolt of lightning)
And proud _Lucifera_ men did her call,
Yet rightfull kingdome she had none at all,
But did vsurpe with wrong and tyrannie
Ne ruld her +Realmes+ with lawes, but pollicie,
That with their counsels bad her kingdome did vphold.
for Satan, and for Venus as the morning star)
Sloth, Gluttony, Lechery, Avarice, Envy and Wrath, described in
the Seven Deadly Sins)
Soone as the +Elfin+ knight in presence came,
A gentle Husher, _Vanitie_ by name
So goodly brought them to the lowest staire
Making +obeyssance+, did the cause declare,
To proue the wide report of her great Maiestee.
With loftie eyes, halfe loth to looke so low,
Ne other grace vouchsafed them to show
Her Lordes and Ladies all this while deuise
Some frounce their curled haire in courtly guise,
Their gay attire: each others greater pride does spight.
Goodly they all that knight do entertaine,
But to _Duess_' each one himselfe did paine
For in that court whylome her well they knew:
Thought all their glorie vaine in knightly vew,
That to strange knight no better countenance allowd.
Suddein vpriseth from her stately place
All +hurtlen+ forth, and she with Princely pace,
Out of the East the dawning day doth call:
The heapes of people thronging in the hall,
Her glorious +glitterand+ light doth all mens eyes amaze.
is one name for the morning star)
So forth she comes, and to her coche does clyme,
That seemd as fresh as _Flora_ in her prime,
Great _Iunoes_ golden chaire, the which they say
To _Ioues_ high house through heauens bras-paued way
And full of _Argus_ eyes their tailes dispredden wide.
sister and wife of Jupiter)
to watch Io and killed by Mercury; Juno placed his eyes in the
tail of the peacock.  See _Met._ 1.622-723; _SC_, gloss to
"Julye" and to "October")
But this was drawne of six vnequall beasts,
Taught to obay their bestiall beheasts,
Of which the first, that all the rest did guyde,
Vpon a slouthfull Asse he chose to ryde,
Like to an holy Monck, the seruice to begin.
similar qualities to their natures employed"; each beast was
appropriate to its rider)
And in his hand his Portesse still he bare,
For of deuotion he had little care,
Scarse could he once vphold his heauie hed,
May seeme the wayne was very euill led,
That knew not, whether right he went, or else astray.
the Divine Office for each day}
From worldly cares himselfe he did esloyne,
+From+ euery worke he chalenged essoyne,
His life he led in lawlesse riotise;
For in his lustlesse limbs through euill guise
Such one was _Idlenesse_, first of this company.
And by his side rode loathsome _Gluttony_,
His belly was vp-blowne with luxury,
And like a Crane his necke was long and fyne,
For want whereof poore people oft did pyne;
He spued vp his gorge, that all did him deteast.
In greene vine leaues he was right fitly clad;
And on his head an yuie girland had,
Still as he rode, he somewhat still did eat,
Of which he supt so oft, that on his seat
In shape and life more like a monster, then a man.
Vnfit he was for any worldly thing,
Not meet to be of counsell to a king,
That from his friend he +seldome+ knew his fo:
And a +dry dropsie+ through his flesh did flow:
Such one was _Gluttony_, the second of that crew.
Horace's _dirus hydrops_; _hydropsy _sugg. Collier_
which watery fluid collects in the tissues and body cavities.
See also Textual Appendix)
And next to him rode lustfull _Lechery_,
And whally eyes (the signe of gelosy,)
Who rough, and blacke, and filthy did appeare,
Yet he of Ladies oft was loued deare,
O who does know the bent of womens fantasy?
FRONT                   Sloth   Gluttony
Avarice   Lechery
Envy   Wrath
Satan
BACK                       Lucifera_
In a greene gowne he clothed was full faire,
And in his hand a burning hart he bare,
For he was false, and fraught with ficklenesse,
And well could daunce, and sing with ruefulnesse,
And thousand other wayes, to bait his fleshly hookes.
Inconstant man, that loued all he saw,
Ne would his looser life be tide to law,
If from their loyall loues he might them moue;
Of that fowle euill, which all men reproue,
Such one was _Lecherie_, the third of all this traine.
And greedy _Auarice_ by him did ride,
Two iron +coffers+ hong on either side,
And in his lap an heape of coine he told;
And vnto hell him selfe for money sold;
And right and wrong ylike in equall ballaunce waide.
His life was nigh vnto deaths doore yplast,
Ne scarse good morsell all his life did tast,
To fill his bags, and richesse to compare;
To leaue them to; but thorough daily care
He led a wretched life vnto him selfe vnknowne.
with a change in punctuation: life to himself, unknown (he was a
Most wretched wight, whom nothing might suffise,
Whose need had end, but no end couetise,
Who had enough, yet wished +euer more+;
A grieuous gout tormented him full sore,
Such one was _Auarice_, the +fourth+ of this faire band.
the most; lack = want, store = measure)
And next to him malicious _Enuie_ rode,
Betweene his cankred teeth a venemous tode,
But inwardly he chawed his owne maw
For death it was, when any good he saw,
But when he heard of harme, he wexed wondrous glad.
All in a kirtle of discolourd say
And in his bosome secretly there lay
In many folds, and mortall sting implyes.
Those heapes of gold with griple Couetyse,
Of proud _Lucifera_, and his owne companie.
He hated all good workes and vertuous deeds,
And who with gracious bread the hungry feeds,
So euery good to bad he doth abuse:
He does backebite, and spightfull poison spues
Such one vile _Enuie_ was, that +fifte+ in row did sitt.
And him beside rides fierce reuenging _Wrath_,
And in his hand a burning brond he hath,
His eyes did hurle forth sparkles fiery red,
As ashes pale of hew and seeming ded;
Trembling through hasty rage, when choler in him sweld.
according to medieval belief, determine one's mental and physical
attributes: phlegm, blood, black bile, and choler.  Choler was
associated with rage)
His ruffin raiment all was staind with blood,
Through vnaduized rashnesse woxen wood;
Ne car'd for bloud in his auengement:
His cruell facts he often would repent;
How many mischieues should ensue his heedlesse hast.
word for the Devil)
Full many mischiefes follow cruell _Wrath_;
Vnmanly murder, and vnthrifty scath,
And fretting griefe the enemy of life;
The swelling Splene, and Frenzy raging rife,
Such one was _Wrath_, the last of this vngodly tire.
associated}
deep red colour}
pull)
And after all, vpon the wagon beame
With which he forward lasht the laesie teme,
Huge routs of people did about them band,
A foggy mist had couered all the land;
Dead sculs and bones of men, whose life had gone astray.
So forth they marchen in this goodly sort,
And in fresh flowring fields themselues to sport;
The fowle _Duessa_, next vnto the chaire
But that good knight would not so nigh repaire,
Whose fellowship seemd far vnfit for warlike swaine.
Spenser)
So hauing solaced themselues a space
They backe returned to the Princely Place;
And heathnish shield, wherein with letters red
Enflam'd with fury and fiers hardy-hed,
And nourish bloudy vengeaunce in his bitter mind.
the word-order here also implies the sense of erring, deviating,
etc.)
Who when the shamed shield of slaine _Sans foy_
Bewraying him, that did of late destroy
He to him leapt, and that same enuious gage
But th'Elfin knight, which ought that warlike wage,
And him +rencountring+ fierce, reskewd the noble pray.
Therewith they gan to +hurtlen+ greedily,
And clash their shields, and shake their +swords+ on hy,
Till that great Queene vpon eternall paine
Commaunded them their fury to refraine,
In equall lists they should the morrow next it fight.
enclosing the tilting-ground)
Ah dearest Dame, (quoth then the Paynim bold,)
Whom great griefe made forget the raines to hold
No knight, but treachour full of false despight
The prowest knight, that euer field did fight,
Whose shield he beares +renuerst+, the more to heape disdayn.
And to augment the glorie of his guile,
Is there possessed of the traytour vile,
Sowen in bloudy field, and bought with woe:
So be, {o^} Queene, you equall fauour showe.
He neuer meant with words, but swords to plead his right.
But threw his gauntlet as a sacred +pledge+,
So been they parted both, with harts on +edge+,
That night they pas in ioy and iollity,
For Steward was excessiue _Gluttonie_,
Which doen, the Chamberlain _Slowth_ did to rest them call.
Now whenas darkesome night had all displayd
The warlike youthes on dayntie couches layd,
To muse on meanes of hoped victory.
Arrested all that courtly company,
And to the Paynims lodging comes with silent pace.
sleep)
Whom broad awake she finds, in troublous fit,
And him amoues with speaches seeming fit:
Cause of my new griefe, cause of +my+ new ioy,
And greeu'd, to thinke how foe did him destroy,
Lo his _Fidessa_ to thy secret faith I flye.
With gentle wordes he can her fairely greet,
Then sighing soft, I learne that litle sweet
For since my brest was launcht with louely dart
But in eternall woes my weaker hart
And for his sake haue felt full many an heauie stowre.
At last when perils all I weened past,
Into new woes vnweeting I was cast,
His worthy shield, whom he with guilefull snare
Me silly maid away with him he bare,
For that I would not yeeld, that to _Sans-foy_ I gaue.
But since faire Sunne hath sperst that lowring clowd,
Vnder your beames I will me safely shrowd,
To you th'inheritance belongs by right
Let not his loue, let not his restlesse spright
From wandring _Stygian_ shores, where it doth endlesse moue.
river across which dead souls must pass.  See _Aen._, 6.312 ff.}
Thereto said he, faire Dame, be nought dismaid
Ne yet of present perill be affraid;
And helplesse hap it booteth not to mone.
Though greeued ghost for vengeance deepe do grone:
And guiltie Elfin bloud shall sacrifice in hast.
O but I feare the fickle freakes (quoth shee)
Why dame (quoth he) what oddes can euer bee,
Yea but (quoth she) he beares a charmed shield,
Ne none can wound the man, that does them wield.
I no whit reck, ne you the like need to reherce.
But faire _Fidessa_, sithens fortunes guile,
Returne from whence ye came, and rest a while
And with _Sans-foyes_ dead dowry you endew.
With proud foes sight my sorrow to renew:
Shall follow you.  So passing forth she him obaid.
_The faithfull knight in equall field
Whom false Duessa saues, and for
THe noble hart, that harbours vertuous thought,
Can neuer rest, vntill it forth haue brought
Such restlesse passion did all night torment
Deuizing, how that doughtie turnament
Still did +he+ wake, and still did watch for dawning light.
At last the golden Orientall +gate,+
And _Ph{oe}bus_ fresh, as bridegrome to his mate,
And +hurld+ his glistring beames through gloomy aire.
He started vp, and did him selfe prepaire,
For with that Pagan proud he combat will that day.
And forth he comes into the +commune+ hall,
To weet what end to straunger knights may fall.
To driue away the dull melancholy,
Can tune their timely voyces cunningly,
Old loues, and warres for Ladies doen by many a Lord.
Soone after comes the cruell Sarazin,
And sternly lookes at him, who not a pin
They bring them wines of _Greece_ and _Araby_,
To kindle heat of corage priuily:
T'obserue the sacred lawes of armes, that are assynd.
At last forth comes that far renowmed Queene,
She is ybrought vnto a paled greene,
The warlike feates of both those knights to see.
_Duessa_ placed is, and on a tree
Both those the lawrell girlonds to the victor dew.
A shrilling trompet sownded from on hye,
Their shining shieldes about their +wrestes+ they tye,
The instruments of wrath and heauinesse:
And strike so fiercely, that they do impresse
The yron walles to ward their blowes are weake and fraile.
The Sarazin was stout, and wondrous strong,
For after bloud and vengeance he did long.
And doubled strokes, like dreaded thunders threat:
Both stricken strike, and beaten both do beat,
And +helmets hewen+ deepe, shew marks of eithers might.
So th'one for wrong, the other striues for right:
A Dragon fiers encountreth in his flight,
That would his rightfull rauine rend away:
And souce so sore, that they the heauens affray:
Th'amazed vulgar tels of warres and mortall fight.
eagle}
prey)
So th'one for wrong, the other striues for right,
The cruell steele so greedily doth bight
With which the armes, that earst so bright did show
Great ruth in all the gazers harts did grow,
That victory they dare not wish to either side.
At last the Paynim chaunst to cast his eye,
Vpon his brothers shield, which hong thereby:
And said, Ah wretched sonne of wofull syre,
Whilest here thy shield is hangd for victors hyre,
To after-send his foe, that him may ouertake?
must pass)
Sansfoy)
Goe caytiue Elfe, him quickly ouertake,
Goe guiltie ghost, to him my message make,
Therewith vpon his crest he stroke him so,
End of the doubtfull battell deemed tho
The false _Duessa_, Thine the shield, and I, and all.
Soone as the Faerie heard his Ladie speake,
And quickning faith, that earst was woxen weake,
Tho mou'd with wrath, and shame, and Ladies sake,
And with so'exceeding furie at him strake,
Had he not stouped so, he should haue clouen bee.
And to him said, Goe now proud Miscreant,
Alone he wandring thee too long doth want:
Therewith his heauie hand he high gan reare,
Vpon him fell: he no where doth appeare,
But answer none receiues: the darknes him does shrowd.
adj. and "deare" as a sb. ("pain, nuisance"), then the Redcross
Knight is insulting both brothers simultaneously)
In haste _Duessa_ from her place arose,
That euer Ladie to her loue did chose,
And quench the flame of furious despight,
Couering your foe with cloud of deadly night,
The conquest yours, I yours, the shield, and glory yours.
baleful = grim; bowers = chambers, rooms)
Not all so satisfide, with greedie eye
To +bathe+ in bloud of faithlesse enemy;
He standes amazed, how he thence should fade.
And running Heralds humble homage made,
And to him brought the shield, the cause of enmitie.
Wherewith he goeth to that soueraine Queene,
To her makes present of his seruice seene:
Greatly aduauncing his gay cheualree.
Whom all the people follow with great glee,
That all the aire it fils, and flyes to heauen bright.
Home is he brought, and laid in sumptuous bed:
To salue his hurts, that yet still freshly bled.
And softly +can+ embalme on euery side.
About the bed sweet musicke did diuide,
And all the while _Duessa_ wept full bitterly.
As when a wearie traueller that strayes
Vnweeting of the perillous wandring wayes,
Which in false griefe hyding his harmefull guile,
The foolish man, that pitties all this while
Forgetfull of his owne, that mindes anothers cares.
So wept _Duessa_ vntill euentide,
Then forth she rose, ne lenger would abide,
In slombring +swownd+ nigh voyd of vitall spright,
Whom when she found, as she him left in plight,
But to the easterne coast of heauen makes speedy way.
Where griesly _Night_, with visage deadly sad,
And in a foule blacke pitchie mantle clad,
Where she all day did hide her hated hew.
Alreadie harnessed for iourney new;
That on their rustie bits did champ, as they were wood.
(father of Sansfoy, Sansloy, and Sansjoy); see _Myth._ 3.12)
nocturnal counterpart of Phoebus's traverse of the sky.  A
"journey" originally meant "a day's travel"; cf. 312.47:4 (1590
stanzas))
Who when she saw _Duessa_ sunny bright,
She greatly grew amazed at the sight,
For neuer did such brightnesse there appeare,
Vntill the witches speech she gan to heare,
Abide, till I haue told the message, which I haue.
She stayd, and foorth _Duessa_ gan proceede,
More old then _Ioue_, whom thou at first didst breede,
Which wast begot in _D{ae}mogorgons_ hall,
Why suffredst thou thy Nephewes deare to fall
Lo where the stout _Sansioy_ doth sleepe in deadly shade.
see _Myth._ 3.12)
(_DGDG_ 1.1); Chaos.  Progenitor of all the gods.  See also
And him before, I saw with bitter eyes
And now the pray of fowles in field he lyes,
That whylome was to me too dearely deare.
If old _Aveugles_ sonnes so euill heare?
When two of three her Nephews are so fowle forlorne?
and the father of Sansfoy, Sansloy, and Sansjoy)
Vp then, vp dreary Dame, of darknesse Queene,
Or else goe them auenge, and let be seene,
And can the children of faire light deface.
In hart, and chaunge in that great mothers face:
Till then: +for+ euermore she hated, neuer loued.
And said, Deare daughter rightly may I rew
And good successes, which their foes ensew:
Or breake the chayne of strong necessitee,
The sonnes of Day he fauoureth, I see,
To make one great by others losse, is bad excheat.
earth, by which he controls all creation.  See _Iliad_ 8.18-27;
intestacy; property so reverting; plunder; forced contribution;
here, perhaps, = "exchange", "bargain"}
Yet shall they not escape so freely all;
And he the man that made _Sansfoy_ to fall,
But what art thou, that telst of Nephews kilt?
(Quoth she) how euer now in garments gilt,
_Duessa_ I, the daughter of Deceipt and Shame.
no consequence)
Then bowing downe her aged backe, she kist
The false resemblance of Deceipt, I wist
It carried, that I scarse in darkesome place
Of falshood, and root of _Duessaes_ race.
And now haue seene vnwares.  Lo now I go with thee.
Then to her yron wagon she betakes,
Through mirkesome aire her readie way she makes.
And two were browne, yet each to each vnlich,
Vnlesse she chaunst their stubborne mouths to twitch;
And trampling the fine element, would fiercely rampe.
at 110.33:9}
So well they sped, that they be come at length
Deuoid of outward sense, and natiue strength,
And sight of men, since his late luckelesse fray.
They binden vp so wisely, as they may,
So lay him in her charet, close in night concealed.
And all the while she stood vpon the ground,
As giuing warning of th'vnwonted sound,
And her darke griesly looke them much dismay;
With drearie shriekes did also her bewray;
At her abhorred face, so filthy and so fowle.
Thence turning backe in silence soft they stole,
To yawning gulfe of deepe _Auernus_ hole.
With smoake and sulphure hiding all the place,
That backe returned without heauenly grace;
And damned sprights sent forth to make ill men aghast.
Lago d'Averno.  Near it was the cave of the Cumaean Sibyl,
through which Aeneas descended to the infernal regions: see
_Aen._ 6.237 ff.)
By that same way the direfull dames doe driue
And downe to _Plutoes_ house are come biliue:
The trembling ghosts with sad amazed mood,
With stonie eyes; and all the hellish brood
To gaze on earthly wight, that with the Night durst ride.
They pas the bitter waues of _Acheron_,
And come to fiery flood of _Phlegeton_,
And with sharp shrilling shriekes doe bootlesse cry,
The house of endlesse paine is built thereby,
The cursed creatures doe eternally torment.
The others are Cocytus, Phlegethon, Lethe, and Styx)
through which fire flows instead of water (see _Aen._ 6.551))
Before the threshold dreadfull _Cerberus_
Curled with thousand adders venemous,
At them he gan to reare his bristles strong,
Did him appease; then downe his taile he hong
For she in hell and heauen had power equally.
_Aen._ 6.417 ff., _Virgil's Gnat_ 345-52)
There was _Ixion_ turned on a wheele,
And _Sisyphus_ an huge round stone did reele
There thirstie _Tantalus_ hong by the chin;
_Typh{oe}us_ ioynts were stretched on a gin,
And fifty sisters water in leake vessels draw.
Juno he was sent to hell and bound to a perpetually revolving
wheel)
of Ulysses.  For his wickedness he was condemned to push uphill a
great marble boulder which constantly rolled down again.  See
_Virgil's Gnat_ 389-92)
Argos, or Corinth.  According to the account preferred, his fatal
crime was (1) to have divulged secrets entrusted to him by
Jupiter, (2) to have offered his son Pelops, in cooked pieces, as
food for the gods, (3) to have stolen ambrosia and nectar from
the table of the gods, or (4) to have feloniously received a
golden dog, the property of the goddess Rhea.  He was punished by
being placed within reach of food and water which drew back
whenever he tried to eat or drink; moreover, a giant rock was
suspended over his head, perpetually threatening to fall and
crush him.  See _Odyssey_ 11.582-92, _Virgil's Gnat_ 385-8)
in some accounts): he was killed, stretched out on a rack, and
condemned to having his liver perpetually eaten by two vultures.
See _Virgil's Gnat_ 377)
with the gods)
end to which the ankles and wrists were attached by ropes)
Proserpine; he was bound to the Chair of Forgetfulness, but was
eventually rescued by Hercules.  See _Aen._ 6.617-8)
condemned endlessly to draw water in sieves.  They killed their
bridegrooms, the fifty sons of Aegyptus; strictly, only forty-
nine sisters were thus condemned, since one of their number,
Hypermnestra, spared her husband.  In the interests of scansion,
Spenser wisely overlooks this detail.  See _Virgil's Gnat_ 393-6)
They all beholding worldly wights in place,
To gaze on them; who forth by them doe pace,
Where was a Caue ywrought by wondrous art,
In which sad {AE}_sculapius_ farre +a part+
For that _Hippolytus_ rent corse he did redresse.
Coronis)
see _Met._ 15.497 ff., _Aen._ 7.761 ff., _DGDG_ 10.50)
_Hippolytus_ a iolly huntsman was,
He all his Peeres in beautie did surpas,
His wanton stepdame loued him the more,
Her loue she turnd to hate, and him before
And with her gealous termes his open eares abused.
Minos, King of Crete.  See _Aen._ 7.761-82, _Met._ 15.497 ff.)
Who all in rage his Sea-god syre besought,
From surging gulf two monsters straight were brought,
Both charet swift and huntsman ouercast.
Was quite dismembred, and his members chast
That of _Hippolytus_ was left no moniment.
King of Athens)
His cruell stepdame seeing what was donne,
In death auowing th'innocence of her sonne.
His haire, and hastie tongue, that did offend:
By _Dianes_ meanes, who was _Hippolyts_ frend,
Did heale them all againe, and ioyned euery part.
and Latona; sister of Apollo)
Such wondrous science in mans wit to raine
And fates expired could renew againe,
But vnto hell did thrust him downe aliue,
Where long remaining, he did alwaies striue
And slake the heauenly fire, that raged euermore.
There auncient Night arriuing, did alight
To {AE}_sculapius_ brought the wounded knight:
Tho gan to him discouer all his harmes,
If either salues, or oyles, or herbes, or charmes
He would at her request prolong her nephews daies.
Ah Dame (quoth he) thou temptest me in vaine,
And the old cause of my continued paine
Is not enough, that thrust from heauen dew
But that redoubled crime with vengeance new
The wrath of thundring _Ioue_, that rules both night and day?
Not so (quoth she) but sith that heauens king
Why fearest thou, that canst not hope for thing,
Now in the powre of euerlasting Night?
Of great _Apollo_, shew thy famous might
Great paines, and greater praise, both neuer to be donne.
later legend he is identified with Paean, Homer's god of healing)
Her words preuaild: And then the learned leach
And all things else, the which his art did teach:
The mother of dread darknesse, and let stay
And backe returning tooke her wonted way,
In westerne waues his wearie wagon did recure.
The false _Duessa_ leauing noyous Night,
Where when she came, she found the Faery knight
Not throughly heald, vnreadie were to ride.
For on a day his wary Dwarfe had spide,
Of caytiue wretched thrals, that wayled night and day.
A ruefull sight, as could be seene with eie;
The hidden cause of their captiuitie,
Through wastfull Pride, and wanton Riotise,
Prouokt with _Wrath_, and _Enuies_ false surmise,
Where they should liue in woe, and die in wretchednesse.
There was that great proud king of _Babylon_,
And him as onely God to call vpon,
Into an Oxe he was transform'd of yore:
His heart too high through his great riches store;
His cursed hand gainst God, and on his altars daunst.
everything he touched to gold)
captured Judea and tried to eradicate Judaism, c. 166 BC)
And them long time before, great _Nimrod_ was,
And after him old _Ninus_ farre did pas
There also was that mightie Monarch layd
That name of natiue syre did fowle vpbrayd,
Till scornd of God and man a shamefull death he dide.
founding of Babylon and Nineveh (_Gen._ 10.9-12))
of Nineveh)
conquered Thebes, Persia, Syria, Phoenicia, Egypt)
temple and oracle at Ammonium (Siwah), in Libya, which was
visited by Alexander.  Ammon was identified by the Romans with
Jupiter)
All these together in one heape were throwne,
And in another corner wide were strowne
Great _Romulus_ the Grandsyre of them all,
Stout _Scipio_, and stubborne _Hanniball_,
High _C{ae}sar_, great _Pompey_, and fierce _Antonius_.
Remus)
of Rome)
gave rise to the Latin noun _Lentulitas_, coined by Cicero,
meaning "the family pride of the Lentuli")
Punic War; after his defeat by Scipio he suffered exile and
committed suicide with poison)
rose from humble origins to become dictator of Rome)
popular party in Rome, seven times a consul, conqueror of
Jugurtha and the Cimbri)
and ambition led to his assassination)
Crassus; Caesar's great rival)
general; committed suicide after defeat by Octavian)
Amongst these mighty men were wemen mixt,
The bold _Semiramis_, whose sides transfixt
Faire _Sthenob{oe}a_, that her selfe did choke
High minded _Cleopatra_, that with stroke
And thousands moe the like, that did that dongeon fill.
her own son, who murdered her)
brother Bellerophon; committed suicide on Bellerophon's marriage)
mistress of Marcus Antonius; killed herself when Antony fell on
his sword)
Besides the endlesse routs of wretched thralles,
From all the world after their wofull falles,
But most of all, which in +that+ Dongeon lay
Where they in idle pompe, or wanton play,
And lastly throwne themselues into these heauy stowres.
seems to be: "Besides the endless routs ... decay, were also,
most of all, those who in that dungeon lay ...")
Whose case when as the carefull Dwarfe had tould,
Vnto his maister, he no lenger would
But early rose, and ere that dawning light
He by a priuie Posterne tooke his flight,
For doubtlesse death ensewd, if any him descryde.
Scarse could he footing find in that fowle way,
Of murdred men which therein strowed lay,
Which all through that great Princesse pride did fall
Forth ryding vnderneath the castell wall,
The dreadfull spectacle of that sad house of _Pride_.
fayre Vna is releast:
and learnes her wise beheast._
AS when a ship, that flyes faire vnder saile,
That lay in waite her wrack for to bewaile,
At perill past, and yet +in+ doubt ne dares
So doubly is distrest twixt ioy and cares
Hauing escapt so sad ensamples in his sight.
Yet sad he was that his too hastie speed
And yet more sad, that _Vna_ his deare dreed
Yet crime in her could neuer creature find,
She wandred had from one to other _Ynd_,
Till her vnwares the fierce _Sansloy_ did ouertake.
to the West Indies.  Cf. _As You Like It_ III ii 78)
Who after _Archimagoes_ fowle defeat,
And turning wrathfull fire to lustfull heat,
And made the vassall of his pleasures vilde.
Her to perswade, that stubborne fort to yilde:
That workes it to his will, then he that it constraines.
With fawning wordes he courted her a while,
Her constant hart did tempt with diuerse guile:
As rocke of Diamond stedfast euermore.
He snatcht the vele, that hong her face before;
And burnt his beastly hart t'efforce her chastitye.
So when he saw his flatt'ring arts to fayle,
With greedy force he gan the fort assayle,
And +win+ rich spoile of ransackt chastetee.
And heauenly virgin thus outraged see,
And hurle not flashing flames vpon that Paynim bold?
The pitteous maiden carefull comfortlesse,
The last vaine helpe of womens great distresse,
That molten starres do drop like weeping eyes;
His blushing face in foggy cloud implyes,
Can now deuise to quit a thrall from such a plight?
Eternall prouidence exceeding thought,
A wondrous way it for this Lady wrought,
Her shrill outcryes and shriekes so loud did bray,
A troupe of _Faunes_ and _Satyres_ far away
Whiles old _Syluanus_ slept in shady arber sownd.
comparatively benign)
usually portrayed as more or less lustful.  In Roman mythology,
Satyr, one of the satyrs, is a companion of Bacchus with long,
pointed ears, behind which are the stumps of horns, with the tail
of a goat, bristly hair, and a flat nose)
Pan)
Who when they heard that pitteous strained voice,
And ran towards the far rebownded noyce,
Vnto the place they come incontinent:
A rude, +misshapen+, monstrous rablement,
But got his ready steed, and fast away gan ride.
The wyld woodgods arriued in the place,
With ruffled rayments, and faire blubbred face,
And trembling yet through feare of former hate;
And gin to pittie her vnhappie state,
In their rude eyes vnworthie of so wofull plight.
She more amaz'd, in double dread doth dwell;
As when a greedie Wolfe through hunger fell
Of whom he meanes his bloudie feast to make,
The innocent pray in hast he does forsake,
With chaunge of feare, to see the Lyon looke so grim.
Such fearefull fit assaid her trembling hart,
The saluage nation feele her secret smart,
Their frowning forheads with rough hornes yclad,
And gently grenning, shew a semblance glad
Their backward bent knees teach her humbly to obay.
backward bent knees to obey her humbly; obey = bow, do obeisance;
The doubtfull Damzell dare not yet commit
But still twixt feare and hope amazd does sit,
They in compassion of her tender youth,
Are wonne with pitty and vnwonted ruth,
Doe kisse her feete, and fawne on her with count'nance faine.
also: a variant spelling of "troth", good faith}
Their harts she ghesseth by their humble guise,
So from the ground she fearelesse doth arise,
They all as glad, as birdes of ioyous Prime,
Shouting, and singing all a shepheards ryme,
Do worship her, as Queene, with oliue girlond cround.
And all the way their merry pipes they sound,
And with their horned feet do weare the ground,
So towards old _Syluanus_ they her bring;
To weet the cause, his weake steps gouerning,
And with an yuie twyne his +wast+ is girt about.
Juliet_ II ii 161)
his "aged limbs")
staddle because of his love for Cyparissus (cf. 106.17; _DGDG_
Far off he wonders, what them makes so glad,
Or _Cybeles_ franticke rites haue made them mad;
That flowre of faith and beautie excellent.
Stood long amazd, and burnt in his intent;
And _Pholoe_ fowle, when her to this he doth compaire.
"merry" also meant, as again it does now, "tipsy"}
worshipped by the Corybants with frenetic music and dancing.
Cybele's priests practised self-castration, which may account for
the reference to her here: cf. the libidinous satyrs at 310.44
ff.)
identified with the Greek deity Pan: see _Aen._ 10.551)
The woodborne people fall before her flat,
And old _Syluanus_ selfe bethinkes not, what
In doubt to deeme her borne of earthly brood;
But _Venus_ neuer had so sober mood;
But misseth bow, and shaftes, and buskins to her knee.
By vew of her he ginneth to reuiue
And calles to mind his pourtraiture aliue,
And how he slew with glauncing dart amisse
Did loue as life, aboue all worldly blisse;
But pynd away in anguish and selfe-wild annoy.
by Apollo: _DGDG_ 13.17, _Myth._ 5.10; _Met._ 10.106-42)
_Met._))
hence Spenser's apostrophe; cf. 310.35:9)
The wooddy Nymphes, faire _Hamadryades_
And all the troupe of light-foot _Naiades_,
But when they vewed haue her heauenly grace,
And fly away for feare of fowle disgrace:
And henceforth nothing faire, but her on earth they find.
means a timber-tree, and specifically the oak, sacred to Zeus
(Jove))
Glad of such lucke, the luckelesse lucky maid,
And long time with that saluage people staid,
During which time her gentle wit she plyes,
And made her th'Image of Idolatryes;
From her own worship, they her Asse would worship fayn.
It fortuned a noble warlike knight
To seeke his kindred, and the lignage right,
He had in armes abroad wonne muchell fame,
Plaine, faithfull, true, and enimy of shame,
But in vaine glorious frayes he litle did delight.
A Satyres sonne yborne in forrest wyld,
And there begotten of a Lady myld,
That was in sacred bands of wedlocke tyde
Who had more ioy to raunge the forrest wyde,
Then serue his Ladies loue, and wast in pleasures vayne.
The forlorne mayd did with loues longing burne,
But to the wood she goes, to serue her turne,
And followes other game and venery:
And kindling coles of lust in brutish eye,
And made her person thrall vnto his beastly kind.
So long in secret cabin there he held
Till that with timely fruit her belly sweld,
Then home he suffred her for to retire,
Whom till to ryper yeares he gan aspire,
Emongst wild beasts and woods, from lawes of men exilde.
For all he taught the tender ymp, was but
His trembling hand he would him force to put
And from the she Beares teats her whelps to teare;
To tame, and ryde their backes not made to beare;
That euery beast for feare of him did fly and quake.
Thereby so fearelesse, and so fell he grew,
Did often tremble at his horrid vew,
The angry beasts not rashly to despise,
The Lyon stoup to him in lowly wise,
Leaue roaring, when in rage he for reuenge did earne.
And for to make his powre approued more,
The spotted Panther, and the tusked Bore,
The Antelope, and Wolfe both +fierce and fell+;
Such ioy he had, their stubborne harts to quell,
That his beheast they feared, as +a+ tyrans law.
fierce horned beast)
His louing mother came vpon a day
And chaunst vnwares to meet him in the way,
When after him a Lyonesse did runne,
Her children deare, whom he away had wonne:
And lull in rugged armes, withouten childish feare.
The fearefull Dame all quaked at the sight,
Vntill with loue reuokt from vaine affright,
And then to him these womanish words gan say;
For loue of me leaue off this dreadfull play;
Go find some other play-fellowes, mine own sweet boy.
In these and like delights of bloudy game
And there abode, whilst any beast of name
To feare his force: and then his courage haught
And far abroad for straunge aduentures sought:
But through all Faery lond his famous worth was blown.
Yet euermore it was his manner faire,
Vnto those natiue woods for to repaire,
And now he thither came for like intent;
Straunge Lady, in so straunge habiliment,
Trew sacred lore, which from her sweet lips did redound.
He wondred at her wisedome heauenly rare,
And when her curteous deeds he did compare,
Blaming of Fortune, which such troubles threw,
On gentle Dame, so hurtlesse, and so trew:
And learnd her discipline of faith and veritie.
Satyrane might be comparing her courteous deeds with those of
other women, or he might be admiring the capacity for courtesy
shown by one in Una's present plight.  Alternatively, the meaning
might be "acquire" (cf. 104.28:5), in the sense that he acquires
knowledge or experience of her courteous deeds.  In any case, the
word can probably be approximately glossed as "come to
appreciate".)
But she all vowd vnto the _Redcrosse_ knight,
Ne in this new acquaintaunce could delight,
And all her wit in secret counsels spent,
To _Satyrane_ she shewed her intent;
How with that pensiue Maid he best might thence arise.
So on a day when Satyres all were gone,
The gentle virgin left behind alone
Too late it was, to Satyres to be told,
In vaine he seekes that hauing cannot hold.
That they the woods are past, and come now to the plaine.
The better part now of the lingring day,
A wearie wight forwandring by the way,
To weet of newes, that did abroad betide,
But he them spying, gan to turne aside,
More greedy they of newes, fast towards him do crosse.
A silly man, in simple weedes forworne,
His sandales were with toilesome trauell torne,
As he had traueild many a sommers day,
And in his hand a _Iacobs_ staffe, to stay
His scrip did hang, in which his needments he did bind.
whose symbols are a pilgrim's staff and a scallop shell; see
_Gen._ 32.10)
or beggar}
The knight approching nigh, of him inquerd
But warres, nor new aduentures none he herd.
Or heard abroad of that her champion trew,
Aye me, Deare dame (quoth he) well may I rew
These eyes did see that knight both liuing and eke ded.
That cruell word her tender hart so thrild,
And stony horrour all her sences fild
The knight her lightly reared vp againe,
Then wonne from death, she bad him tellen plaine
The lesser pangs can beare, who hath endur'd the chiefe.
Then gan the Pilgrim thus, I chaunst this day,
To see two knights in trauell on my way
Both breathing vengeaunce, both of wrathfull hew:
To see their blades so greedily imbrew,
What more? the _Redcrosse_ knight was slaine with Paynim knife.
Ah dearest Lord (quoth she) how might that bee,
Ah dearest dame (quoth he) how might I see
Where is (said _Satyrane_) that Paynims sonne,
Not far away (quoth he) he hence doth wonne
Washing his bloudy wounds, that through the steele were cleft.
Therewith the knight thence marched forth in hast,
Could not for sorrow follow him so fast;
Whereas that _Pagan_ proud him selfe did rest,
Euen he it was, that earst would haue supprest
With fowle reprochfull words he boldly him defide.
And said, Arise thou cursed Miscreaunt,
Faire knighthood fowly shamed, and doest vaunt
Arise, and with like treason now maintain
The Sarazin this hearing, rose amain,
And shining helmet, soone him buckled to the field.
battle; buckled his armour
And drawing nigh him said, Ah misborne Elfe,
Anothers wrongs to wreake vpon thy selfe:
My name with guile and traiterous intent;
But had he beene, where earst his armes were lent,
But thou his errour shalt, I hope now prouen trew.
premature birth}
Archimago at 103.34-39)
Redcross Knight, or the error made by the Redcross Knight in
killing Sansfoy, which ultimately led to Archimago being wounded
and unhorsed)
Therewith they gan, both furious and fell,
Each other bent his enimy to quell,
And made wide furrowes in their fleshes fraile,
Large floods of bloud adowne their sides did raile;
Both hungred after death: both chose to win, or die.
both of steel plates and of chain mail)
So long they fight, and +fell+ reuenge pursue,
And oft refreshed, battell oft renue:
Their gory sides fresh bleeding fiercely fret,
Where foming wrath, their cruell tuskes they whet,
Then backe to fight againe, new breathed and entire.
becomes temporarily faint allows them both a chance to recover
So fiersly, when these knights had breathed once,
Their puissant force, and cruell rage attonce,
That with their drerie wounds and bloudy gore
By this sad _Vna_ fraught with anguish sore,
Arriu'd, where they in erth their fruitles bloud had sown.
Whom all so soone as that proud Sarazin
Of his lewd lusts, and late attempted sin,
To catch her, newly offred to his eie:
And sternely bad him other businesse plie,
Wherewith he all enrag'd, these bitter speaches said.
O foolish faeries sonne, what furie mad
Were it not better, I that Lady had,
Most sencelesse man he, that himselfe doth hate,
Here take thy louers token on thy pate.
Fled farre away, of that proud Paynim sore afrayd.
worn on the helmet}
But that false _Pilgrim_, which that leasing told,
In secret shadow, all this to behold,
But when he saw the Damsell passe away
In hope to bring her to her last decay.
And eke this battels end, will need another place.
By Gyaunt proud opprest,
ly with those newes distrest._
WHat man so wise, what earthly wit so ware,
By which deceipt doth maske in visour faire,
To seeme like Truth, whose shape she well can faine,
The guiltlesse man with guile to entertaine?
The false _Duessa_, cloked with _Fidessaes_ name.
Who when returning from the drery _Night_,
Where she had left, the noble _Redcrosse_ knight,
But forth she went, to seeke him far and wide.
To reste him selfe, foreby a fountaine side,
And by his side his steed the grassy forage ate.
He feedes vpon the cooling shade, and bayes
Which through the trembling leaues full gently playes
Do chaunt sweet musick, to delight his mind:
And with reproch of carelesnesse vnkind
With fowle words tempring faire, soure gall with hony sweet.
Vnkindnesse past, they gan of solace treat,
Which shielded them against the boyling heat,
About the fountaine like a girlond made;
Ne euer would through feruent sommer fade:
Was out of _Dianes_ fauour, as it then befell.
peopled all parts of nature: the seas, springs, rivers, grottoes,
trees, mountains.  The nymph referred to here is one of the naiads
(see 106.18:3), nymphs of fresh water.  Many of these presided
over springs which were believed to inspire those who drank the
water)
The cause was this: one day when _Ph{oe}be_ fayre
This Nymph, quite tyr'd with heat of scorching ayre
The goddesse wroth gan fowly +her+ disgrace,
Be such as she her selfe was then in place.
And all that drunke thereof, +did+ faint and feeble grow.
Hereof this gentle knight vnweeting was,
Drunke of the streame, as cleare as cristall +glas,+
And mightie strong was turnd to feeble fraile.
Till crudled cold his corage can assaile,
Which like a feuer fit through all his body swelt.
sense}
Yet goodly court he made still to his Dame,
Both carelesse of his health, and of his fame:
Which through the wood loud bellowing, did rebownd,
And trees did tremble.  Th'Elfe therewith astownd,
And his vnready weapons gan in hand to take.
But ere he could his armour on him dight,
With sturdie steps came stalking in his sight,
That with his talnesse seemd to threat the skye,
His liuing like saw neuer liuing eye,
The hight of three the tallest sonnes of mortall seed.
The greatest Earth his vncouth mother was,
Who with his breath, which through the world doth pas,
And fild her hidden caues with stormie yre,
In which the wombes of women do expire,
Puft vp with emptie wind, and fild with sinfull crime.
interpretation may apply in line 5)
So growen great through arrogant delight
And through presumption of his matchlesse might,
Such now he marcheth to this man forlorne,
Vpon a snaggy Oke, which he had torne
His mortall mace, wherewith his foemen he dismayde.
That when the knight he spide, he gan aduance
And towardes him with dreadfull fury praunce;
Did to him pace, sad battaile to darrayne,
And eke so faint in euery ioynt and vaine,
That scarsely could he weeld his bootlesse single blade.
The Geaunt strooke so maynly mercilesse,
And were not heauenly grace, that him did blesse,
But he was wary of that deadly stowre,
Yet so exceeding was the villeins powre,
And all his sences +stound+, that still he lay full low.
As when that diuelish yron Engin wrought
With windy Nitre and quick Sulphur fraught,
Conceiueth fire, the heauens it doth fill
That none can breath, nor see, nor heare at will,
That th'onely breath him daunts, who hath escapt the stroke.
So daunted when the Geaunt saw the +knight+
And him to dust thought to haue battred quight,
O great _Orgoglio_, greatest vnder skye,
Hold for my sake, and do him not to dye,
And me thy worthy meed vnto thy Leman take.
He hearkned, and did stay from further harmes,
So willingly she came into his armes,
And was possessed of his new found make.
And ere he could out of his swowne awake,
And in a Dongeon deepe him threw without remorse.
sense)
From that day forth _Duessa_ was his deare,
He gaue her gold and purple pall to weare,
And her endowd with royall maiestye:
And peoples harts with awfull terrour tye,
He chose, which he had kept long time in darksome den.
Such one it was, as that renowmed Snake
Long fostred in the filth of _Lerna_ lake,
Did breed him endlesse labour to subdew:
For seuen great heads out of his body grew,
And all embrewd in bloud, his eyes did shine as glas.
lived in the swamps of Lerna Lake in Argos and was killed by
Hercules as his second labour; see _Met._ 9.68-74)
Strymon forms one boundary.  Thrace was noted for its seditions
(Upton); though Lerna was not in Thrace)
the seven hills of Rome)
His tayle was stretched out in wondrous length,
And with extorted powre, and borrow'd strength,
And prowdly threw to ground, as things of +nought+;
The sacred things, and holy heasts foretaught.
He set the false _Duessa_, for more aw and dread.
The wofull Dwarfe, which saw his maisters fall,
And valiant knight become a caytiue thrall,
His mightie armour, missing most at need;
His poynant speare, that many made to bleed,
And with them all departes, to tell his great distresse.
He had not trauaild long, when on the way
Fast flying from +the+ Paynims greedy pray,
Who when her eyes she on the Dwarfe had set,
She fell to ground for sorrowfull regret,
Yet might her pitteous hart be seene to pant and quake.
seizing, or taking by force)
The messenger of so vnhappie newes,
Yet outwardly some little comfort shewes:
To rub her temples, and to chaufe her chin,
So hardly he the flitted life does win,
Then gins her grieued ghost thus to lament and mourne.
Ye dreary instruments of dolefull sight,
Why do ye lenger feed on loathed light,
Sith cruell fates the carefull threeds vnfould,
Now let the stony dart of senselesse cold
And let eternall night so sad sight fro me hide.
the thread of human destiny, cutting it with shears whenever they
choose; see 402.48)
O lightsome day, the lampe of highest _Ioue_,
When darknesse he in deepest dongeon droue,
And shut vp heauens windowes shyning wyde:
And late repentance, which shall long abyde.
But seeled vp with death, shall haue their deadly meed.
Then downe againe she fell vnto the ground;
Thrise did she sinke adowne in deadly swownd,
At last when life recouer'd had the raine,
With foltring tong, and trembling euery vaine,
The which these reliques sad present vnto mine eie.
Tempestuous fortune hath spent all her spight,
Thy sad tongue cannot tell more heauy plight,
Who hath endur'd the whole, can beare each part.
That launched hath my brest with bleeding smart.
If lesse, then that I +feare+ more fauour I haue found.
Then gan the Dwarfe the whole discourse declare,
The wanton loues of false _Fidessa_ faire,
The wretched payre transform'd to treen mould;
The combat, which he with _Sansioy_ did hould;
Wherein captiu'd, of life or death he stood in doubt.
She heard with patience all vnto the end,
Which greater grew, the more she did contend,
And loue fresh coles vnto her fire did lay:
Was neuer Ladie loued dearer day,
For whose deare sake so many troubles her did tosse.
At last when feruent sorrow slaked was,
A liue or dead: and forward forth doth pas,
And euermore in constant carefull mind
Long tost with stormes, and bet with bitter wind,
She wandred many a wood, and measurd many a vale.
At last she chaunced by good hap to meet
Together with his Squire, arayed meet:
Like glauncing light of _Ph{oe}bus_ brightest ray;
That deadly dint of steele endanger may:
That shynd, like twinkling stars, with stons most pretious rare.
sword}
And in the midst thereof one pretious stone
Shapt like a Ladies head, exceeding shone,
And stroue for to amaze the weaker sights;
In yuory sheath, ycaru'd with curious slights;
Of mother pearle, and buckled with a golden tong.
Monmouth (_Historia Regum Britanniae_ 9.4), Arthur's shield bore
an image of the Virgin Mary)
apparently used here catachr. to denote the guard, "that part of
His haughtie helmet, horrid all with gold,
For all the crest a Dragon did enfold
His golden wings: his dreadfull hideous hed
From flaming mouth bright sparkles fierie red,
And scaly tayle was stretcht adowne his backe full low.
on Arthur's helmet; Arthur's father, Uther Pendragon, also wore
such a device, and from it derived his name: the Brythonic "pen" =
"head")
Vpon the top of all his loftie crest,
With sprincled pearle, and gold fully richly drest,
Like to an Almond tree ymounted hye
With blossomes braue bedecked daintily;
At euery little breath, that vnder heauen is blowne.
the Carthaginians in 409, when the greater portion was destroyed,
it is now called Selinoto, the "town of palms".  Virgil (_Aen._
give the victorious gladiator a branch of the palm-tree)
His warlike shield all closely couer'd was,
Not made of steele, nor of enduring bras,
But all of Diamond perfect pure and cleene
Hewen out of Adamant rocke with engines keene,
Ne dint of direfull sword diuide the substance would.
The same to wight he neuer wont disclose,
Or daunt vnequall armies of his foes,
For so exceeding shone his glistring ray,
As when a cloud his beames doth ouer-lay;
As when her face is staynd with magicke arts constraint.
Merlin himself at 303.12)
No magicke arts hereof had any might,
But all that was not such, as seemd in sight,
And when him list the raskall routes appall,
And stones to dust, and dust to nought at all;
He would them gazing blind, or turne to other hew.
Ne let it seeme, that credence this exceedes,
To haue done much more admirable deedes.
All liuing wightes in might of magicke spell:
For this young Prince, when first to armes he fell;
To Faerie lond, where yet it may be seene, if sought.
A gentle youth, his dearely loued Squire
Whose harmefull head, thrice heated in the fire,
A goodly person, and could menage +faire,+
Who vnder him did +trample+ as the aire,
The yron rowels into frothy fome he bit.
_Diospyros ebenus_, producing hard black wood}
fastened to the upper ends of the branches of the bit: used for
controlling an unruly horse}
When as this knight nigh to the Ladie drew,
But when he heard her answeres loth, he knew
Which to allay, and calme her storming paine,
And for her humour fitting purpose faine,
Wherewith +emmou'd+, these bleeding words she gan to say.
What worlds delight, or ioy of liuing speach
And heaped with so huge misfortunes, reach?
And in my heart his yron arrow steepe,
Such helplesse harmes yts better hidden keepe,
My last left comfort is, my woes to weepe and waile.
Ah Ladie deare, quoth then the gentle knight,
For wondrous great griefe groneth in my spright,
But wofull Ladie let me you intrete,
Mishaps are maistred by aduice discrete,
Found neuer helpe, who neuer would his hurts impart.
O but (quoth she) great griefe will not be tould,
Right so; (quoth he) but he, that neuer would,
But griefe (quoth she) does greater grow displaid,
Despaire breedes not (quoth he) where faith is staid.
Flesh may empaire (quoth he) but reason can repaire.
His goodly reason, and well guided speach
That her perswaded to disclose the breach,
And said; +faire+ Sir, I hope good hap hath brought
Or that your wisedome will direct my thought,
Then heare the storie sad, which I shall tell you briefe.
The forlorne Maiden, whom your eyes haue seene
Am th'only daughter of a King and Queene,
Did runne about, and their felicities
Did spread their rule through all the territories,
And +_Gehons_+ golden waues doe wash continually.
(_Gen._ 2.14))
Till that their cruell cursed enemy,
Bred in the loathly lakes of _Tartary_,
Their kingdome spoild, and countrey wasted quight:
He forst to castle strong to take their flight,
He has them now foure yeres besiegd to make them thrall.
"the woman clothed with the sun" lasted 1,260 days; at 12.14,
having been cast down again, she flees from Satan to the
wilderness and spends there "a time, and times, and half a time",
possibly a reference to three and a half years; Hamilton (1980)
suggests that "four years" might also represent 4,000 years, the
period, in round terms, which, according to the Geneva Bible,
elapsed between the Creation and the birth of Christ)
Full many knights aduenturous and stout
From euery coast that heauen walks about,
That famous hard atchieuements still pursew,
But all still shronke, and still he greater grew:
The pitteous pray of his fierce crueltie haue bin.
At last yledd with farre reported praise,
Of doughtie knights, whom Faery land did raise,
Forthwith to court of _Gloriane_ I sped,
Whose kingdomes seat _Cleopolis_ is red,
That Parents deare from tyrants powre deliuer might.
chivalric order of English knighthood, instituted c. 1344; the
sovereign (i.e. Elizabeth I, the Virgin Queen) is head of the
order.  Its emblems include the Red Cross and St George slaying
the dragon)
glory)
It was my chance (my chance was faire and good)
Whose manly hands imbrew'd in guiltie blood
Had throwne to ground the vnregarded right:
(I witnesse am) in many a cruell fight;
Haue felt the bitter dint of his auenging blade.
And ye the forlorne reliques of his powre,
Which haue endured many a dreadfull stowre,
And well could rule: now he hath left you heare,
And of my dolefull disauenturous deare:
Where haue +you+ left your Lord, that could so well you tosse?
Well hoped I, and faire beginnings had,
Till all vnweeting, an Enchaunter bad
My loyalty, not such as it did seeme;
Be iudge ye heauens, that all things right esteeme,
So thought I eke of him, and thinke I thought aright.
Thenceforth me desolate he quite forsooke,
And other bywaies he himselfe betooke,
That brought not backe the balefull body dead;
Mine onely foe, mine onely deadly dread,
Inueigled him to follow her desires vnmeete.
sweetness
At last by subtill sleights she him betraid
Who him disarmed, dissolute, dismaid,
The monster mercilesse him made to fall,
And now in darkesome dungeon, wretched thrall,
This is my cause of griefe, more great, then may be told.
Ere she had ended all, she gan to faint:
Certes, Madame, ye haue great cause of plaint,
But be of cheare, and comfort to you take:
Assure your selfe, I will you not forsake.
So forth they went, the Dwarfe them guiding euer right.
Fair virgin, to redeem her dear,
Who slays the giant, wounds the beast,
AY me, how many perils doe enfold
Were not, that heauenly grace doth him vphold,
Her loue is firme, her care continuall,
Or weaknesse is to sinfull bands made thrall:
For whose deliuerance she this Prince doth thither guide.
They sadly traueild thus, vntill they came
Then cryde the Dwarfe, lo yonder is the same,
Thrall to that Gyants hatefull tyrannie:
The noble knight alighted by and by
To see what end of fight should him befall that day.
So with +the+ Squire, th'admirer of his might,
Whose gates he found fast shut, ne liuing wight
Then tooke that Squire an horne of bugle small,
And tassels gay.  Wyde wonders ouer all
Which had approued bene in vses manifold.
Was neuer wight, that heard that shrilling sound,
Three miles it might be easie heard around,
No false enchauntment, nor deceiptfull traine
But presently was voide and wholly vaine:
But with that percing noise flew open quite, or brast.
The same before the Geants gate he blew,
And euery dore of freewill open flew.
Where he with his _Duessa_ dalliance fownd,
With staring countenance sterne, as one astownd,
Had wrought that horror strange, and dar'd his dreaded powre.
implying "unjoined", "unlinked")
And after him the proud _Duessa_ came,
And euery head with fyrie tongue did flame,
And bloudie mouthed with late cruell feast.
Vpon his manly arme he soone addrest,
And eger greedinesse through euery member thrild.
Therewith the Gyant buckled him to fight,
And lifting vp his dreadfull club on hight,
Him thought at first encounter to haue slaine.
And lightly leaping from so monstrous maine,
It booted nought, to thinke, such thunderbolts to beare.
Ne shame he thought to shunne so hideous might:
Missing the marke of his misaymed sight
So deepely dinted in the driuen clay,
The sad earth wounded with so sore assay,
And trembling with strange feare, did like an earthquake show.
As when almightie _Ioue_ in wrathfull mood,
Hurles forth his thundring dart with deadly food,
Through riuen cloudes and molten firmament;
Both loftie towres and highest trees hath rent,
And shooting in the earth, casts vp a mount of clay.
His boystrous club, so buried in the ground,
But that the knight him at +auantage+ found,
Out of the earth, with blade all burning bright
Did fall to ground, depriu'd of natiue might;
Forth gushed, like fresh water streame from riuen rocke.
Dismaied with so desperate deadly wound,
He loudly brayd with beastly yelling sound,
As great a noyse, as when in Cymbrian plaine
Do for the milkie mothers want complaine,
The neighbour woods around with hollow +murmur ring+.
pain
(1) Cumbrian: Cumbria is a region in NW England which Spenser
probably knew; (2) Cambrian, meaning Welsh; (3) Cimbrian, after
the Cimbrian peninsula in modern Denmark, once noted for the
ferocity of its inhabitants; (4) Crimean: relating to the Tauric
Chersonese, once inhabited by the Cimmerii)
That when his deare _Duessa_ heard, and saw
Vnto his aide she hastily did draw
Came ramping forth with proud +presumpteous+ gate,
But him the Squire made quickly to retrate,
And twixt him and his Lord did like bulwarke stand.
The proud _Duessa_ full of wrathfull spight,
Enforst her purple beast with all her might
Scorning the let of so vnequall foe:
To her yeeld passage, gainst his Lord to goe,
And with his bodie bard the way atwixt them twaine.
Then tooke the angrie witch her golden cup,
Death and despeyre did many thereof sup,
Th'eternall bale of heauie wounded harts;
She lightly sprinkled on his weaker parts;
And all his senses were with suddeine dread dismayd.
So downe he fell before the cruell beast,
That life +nigh+ crusht out of his panting brest:
That when the carefull knight gan well auise,
And to the beast gan turne his enterprise;
To see his loued Squire into such thraldome brought.
And high aduauncing his bloud-thirstie blade,
That of his puissance proud ensample made;
And that misformed shape mis-shaped more:
That her gay garments staynd with filthy gore,
That ouer shoes in bloud he waded on the ground.
Thereat he roared for exceeding paine,
And scourging th'emptie ayre with his long traine,
His gorgeous ryder from her loftie sted
Had not the Gyant soone her succoured;
Came hurtling in full fierce, and forst the knight retyre.
The force, which wont in two to be disperst,
Which is through rage more strong then both were erst;
And at his foe with furious rigour smites,
The stroke vpon his shield so heauie lites,
What mortall wight could euer beare so monstrous blow?
And in his fall his shield, that couered was,
The light whereof, that heauens light did pas,
That eye mote not the same endure to vew.
He downe let fall his arme, and soft withdrew
For to haue slaine the man, that on the ground did lye.
And eke the fruitfull-headed beast, amaz'd
Became starke blind, and all his senses daz'd,
And seem'd himselfe as conquered to yield.
Whiles yet his feeble feet for faintnesse reeld,
O helpe _Orgoglio_, helpe, or else we perish all.
At her so pitteous cry was much +amoou'd,+
Againe his wonted angry weapon proou'd:
In that bright shield, and all +their+ forces spend
He hath no powre to hurt, nor to defend;
It dimmes the dazed eyen, and daunts the senses quight.
Duessa_
Whom when the Prince, to battell new addrest,
His sparkling blade about his head he blest,
That downe he tombled; as an aged tree,
Whose hartstrings with keene steele nigh hewen be,
Doth roll adowne the rocks, and fall with fearefull drift.
here:_ central fibres of heartwood}
(e.g. at 112.23:4); "rift" may also mean "rubble": cf. this same
phrase at 212.4:5)
Or as a Castle reared high and round,
Is vndermined from the lowest ground,
At last downe falles, and with her heaped hight
And yields it selfe vnto the victours might;
The stedfast globe of earth, as it for feare did quake.
The knight then lightly leaping to the pray,
That headlesse his vnweldy bodie lay,
Which flowed from his wounds in wondrous +store,+
That huge great body, which the Gyaunt bore,
Was nothing left, but like an emptie bladder was.
Whose grieuous fall, when false _Duessa_ spide,
And crowned mitre rudely threw aside;
That she could not endure that dolefull stound,
The light-foot Squire her quickly turnd around,
So brought vnto his Lord, as his deserued pray.
episcopal office or dignity)
dialect)}
The royall Virgin, which beheld from farre,
The whole atchieuement of this doubtfull warre,
With sober gladnesse, and myld modestie,
Faire braunch of noblesse, flowre of cheualrie,
How shall I quite the paines, ye suffer for my sake?
And you fresh bud of vertue springing fast,
What hath poore Virgin for such perill past,
My simple selfe, and seruice euermore;
With equall +eyes+, their merites to restore,
And what I cannot quite, requite with vsuree.
But sith the heauens, and your faire +handeling+
Your fortune maister eke with gouerning,
Ne let that wicked woman scape away;
My dearest Lord, and deepe in dongeon lay,
O heare, how piteous he to you for ayd does call.
Forthwith he gaue in charge vnto his Squire,
Whiles he himselfe with greedie great desire
Where liuing creature none he did espye;
But no man car'd to answere to his crye.
Nor voice was heard, nor wight was seene in bowre or hall.
deep-dyed (_Isa._ 1.18))
banquets and receptions, much larger than the inner rooms or
bowers}
At last with creeping crooked pace forth came
That on a staffe his feeble steps did frame,
For his eye sight him failed long ygo,
The which vnused rust did ouergrow:
But he could not them vse, but kept them still in store.
and as a synonym for unregenerate human nature, as in "Old Adam")
But very vncouth sight was to behold,
For as he forward moou'd his footing old,
Vnlike to men, who euer as they trace,
This was the auncient keeper of that place,
His name _Ignaro_ did his nature right aread.
His reuerend haires and holy grauitie
And gently askt, where all the people bee,
Who answerd him full soft, he could not tell.
Whom great _Orgoglio_ with his puissaunce fell
He could not tell: ne euer other answere made.
Then asked he, which way he in might pas:
Thereat the curteous knight displeased was,
How ill it +sits+ with that same siluer hed
But if thou be, as thou art pourtrahed
Aread in grauer wise, what I demaund of thee.
of "sir"}
His answere likewise was, he could not tell.
When as the noble Prince had marked well,
And calmd his wrath with goodly temperance.
Those keyes, and made himselfe free enterance.
There was no barre to stop, nor foe him to empeach.
There all within full rich arayd he found,
And did with store of euery thing abound,
But all the floore (too filthy to be told)
Which there were slaine, as sheepe out of the fold,
And sacred ashes ouer it was strowed new.
fernal deities, hence: devoted to destruction (Latin _sacer_)}
And there beside of marble stone was built
On which true Christians bloud was often spilt,
With cruell malice and strong tyranny:
To God for vengeance cryde continually,
That hardest heart would bleede, to heare their piteous mone.
Through euery rowme he sought, and euery bowr,
At last he came vnto an yron doore,
Emongst that bounch, to open it withall;
Through which he sent his voyce, and lowd did call
Were housed therewithin, whom he enlargen might.
Therewith an hollow, dreary, murmuring voyce
O who is that, which brings me happy choyce
Yet liue perforce in balefull darkenesse bound?
And haue beene thrice hid vnderneath the ground,
O welcome thou, that doest of death bring tydings trew.
Which when that Champion heard, with percing point
And trembling horrour ran through euery ioynt,
Which shaking off, he rent that yron dore,
Where entred in, his foot could find no flore,
That breathed euer forth a filthie banefull smell.
But neither darkenesse fowle, nor filthy bands,
(Entire affection hateth nicer hands)
After long paines and labours manifold,
Whose feeble thighes, vnhable to vphold
A ruefull spectacle of death and ghastly drere.
His sad dull eyes deepe sunck in hollow pits,
His bare thin cheekes for want of better bits,
Could make a stony hart his hap to rew;
Were wont to riue steele plates, +and+ helmets hew,
Decayd, and all his flesh shronk vp like withered flowres.
Whom when his Lady saw, to him she ran
And sad to view his visage pale and wan,
Tho when her well of teares she wasted had,
On you hath fround, and pourd his influence bad,
And this misseeming hew your manly looks doth marre?
sense}
But welcome now my Lord, in wele or woe,
And +fie+ on Fortune mine auowed foe,
And for these wrongs shall treble penaunce pay
The chearelesse man, whom sorrow did dismay,
His long endured famine needed more reliefe.
Faire Lady, then said that victorious knight,
Them to renew, I wote, breeds no delight;
But th'onely good, that growes of passed feare,
This dayes ensample hath this lesson deare
That blisse may not abide in state of mortall men.
intention might perhaps be: "Best music, rather than going over
old ground, breeds delight ...")
Henceforth sir knight, take to you wonted strength,
Loe where your foe lyes stretcht in monstrous length,
The roote of all your care, and wretched plight,
To do her dye (quoth _Vna_) were despight,
But spoile her of her scarlot robe, and let her fly.
implies)
So as she bad, that witch they disaraid,
And ornaments that richly were displaid;
Then when they had despoild her tire and call,
That her +misshaped+ parts did them appall,
Whose secret filth good manners biddeth not be told.
Her craftie head was altogether bald,
Was ouergrowne with scurfe and filthy scald;
And her sowre breath abhominably smeld;
Hong downe, and filthy matter from them weld;
So scabby was, that would haue loathd all womankind.
Her neather parts, the shame of all her kind,
But at her rompe she growing had behind
And eke her feete most monstrous were in sight;
With griping talaunts armd to greedy fight,
More vgly shape yet neuer liuing creature saw.
Which when the knights beheld, amazd they were,
Such then (said _Vna_) as she seemeth here,
Of fowle _Duessa_, when her borrowed light
Thus when they had the witch disrobed quight,
They let her goe at will, and wander wayes vnknowne.
She flying fast from heauens hated face,
Fled to the wastfull wildernesse apace,
And +lurkt+ in rocks and caues long vnespide.
Did in that castle afterwards abide,
Where store they found of all, that dainty was and rare.
_His loues and lignage Arthur +tells:+
Sir Treuisan flies from Despayre,
Textual Appendix: 1590 is supported by 109.1:8, 109.18:9)
O Goodly golden chaine, wherewith yfere
And noble minds of yore allyed were,
That none did others safety despize,
But friendly each did others prayse +deuize,+
As this good Prince redeemd the _Redcrosse_ knight from bands.
_Knight's Tale_, 2990 and _Troilus and Criseyde_ 3.1746-9; and
cf. 105.25, 207.46)
Who when their +powres+ empaird through labour long,
And that weake captiue wight now wexed strong,
But forward fare, as their aduentures fell,
That straunger knight his name and nation tell;
Should die vnknown, and buried be in thanklesse thought.
manner)
Faire virgin (said the Prince) ye me require
For both the lignage and the certain Sire,
For all so soone as life did me admit
From mothers pap I taken was vnfit:
To be vpbrought in gentle thewes and martiall might.
Vnto old _Timon_ he me brought byliue,
In warlike feates th'expertest man aliue,
His dwelling is low in a valley greene,
From whence the riuer _Dee_ as siluer cleene
There all my dayes he traind me vp in vertuous lore.
name meaning "he who is honoured", "he who is held in respect".
Plainly Arthur is referring here to Sir Ector, to whom (in
Malory) his upbringing was entrusted by Merlin)
Merioneth, Wales, though this name is not in the _Ordnance Survey
Gazetteer of Great Britain_ or the _Times Index-Gazetteer of the
World_.  See also note in Hamilton (1980))
marshy, peaty (if referring to the valley)
"mossy and hoar"}
Thither the great Magicien _Merlin_ came,
For he had charge my discipline to frame,
Him oft and oft I askt in priuitie,
Whose aunswere bad me still assured bee,
As time in her iust terme the truth to light should bring.
Well worthy impe, said then the Lady gent,
But what aduenture, or what high intent
Aread Prince _Arthur_, crowne of Martiall band?
The course of heauenly cause, or vnderstand
That rules mens wayes, and rules the thoughts of liuing wight.
For whither he though fatall deepe foresight
Or that fresh bleeding wound, which day and night
With forced fury following his behest,
You to haue helpt I hold my selfe yet blest.
Could euer find, to grieue the gentlest hart on ground?
Dear Dame (quoth he) you sleeping sparkes awake,
Ne euer will their feruent fury slake,
And wasted life do lye in ashes low.
But told it flames, and hidden it does glow,
Ah Loue, lay downe thy bow, the whiles I may respire.
It was in freshest flowre of youthly yeares,
Then first +the+ coale of kindly heat appeares
But me had warnd old _Timons_ wise behest,
Before their rage grew to so great vnrest,
Which still wex old in woe, whiles woe still wexeth new.
That idle name of loue, and louers life,
I euer scornd, and ioyd to stirre vp strife,
Ay wont to laugh, when them I heard to cry,
Their God himselfe, grieu'd at my libertie,
But I them warded all with wary gouernment.
But all in vaine: no fort can be so strong,
But will at last be wonne with battrie long,
Nothing is sure, that growes on earthly ground:
And boasts, in beauties chaine not to be bound,
And yeeldes his caytiue neck to victours most despight.
Ensample make of him your haplesse ioy,
Whose prouder vaunt that proud auenging boy
For on a day prickt forth with iollitie
Raunging the forest wide on courser free,
Did seeme to laugh +on+ me, and fauour mine intent.
For-wearied with my sports, I did alight
The verdant gras my couch did goodly dight,
Whiles euery sence the humour sweet embayd,
Me seemed, by my side a royall Mayd
So faire a creature yet saw neuer sunny day.
"bunch of haires" mentioned at 107.32:2, and "helmet" should thus
be read as "helm" or "crest"; but cf. 304.53:9)
Most goodly glee and louely blandishment
For dearely sure her loue was to me bent,
But whether dreames delude, or true it were,
Ne liuing man like words did euer heare,
And at her parting said, She Queene of Faeries hight.
When I awoke, and found her place deuoyd,
I sorrowed all so much, as earst I ioyd,
From that day forth I lou'd that face diuine;
To seeke her out with labour, and long tyne,
Nine monethes I seeke in vaine yet ni'll that vow vnbind.
Thus as he spake, his visage wexed pale,
Yet still he stroue to cloke his inward bale,
Till gentle _Vna_ thus to him gan say;
Mongst many, one that with his prowesse may
True Loues are often sown, but seldom grow on ground.
fire, pyre, bonfire
Thine, O then, said the gentle _Redcrosse_ knight,
O fairest virgin, full of heauenly light,
Was firmest fixt in mine extremest case.
Of that great Queene may well gaine worthy grace:
Yf liuing man mote worthy be, to be her liefe.
"noble, high-born" would be to anticipate the revelation at
So diuersly discoursing of their loues,
And sad remembraunce now the Prince amoues,
Als _Vna_ earnd her traueill to renew.
And loue establish each to other trew,
And eke +as+ pledges firme, right hands together ioynd.
Prince _Arthur_ gaue a boxe of Diamond sure,
Wherein were closd few drops of liquor pure,
That any wound could heale incontinent:
A booke, wherein his Saueours testament
A worke of wondrous grace, and able soules to saue.
to the box)
Thus beene they parted, _Arthur_ on his way
With _Vnaes_ foe, that all her realme did pray.
And shrunken synewes of her chosen knight,
Ne bring him forth in face of dreadfull fight,
For him to be yet weake and wearie well she knew.
So as they traueild, lo they gan espy
That seemed from some feared foe to fly,
Still as he fled, his eye was backward cast,
Als flew his steed, as he his bands had brast,
As he had beene a fole of _Pegasus_ his kind.
in current use)
winged horse, said to have sprung from the blood of Medusa (see
_Met._ 4.785-6).  In later myth, he is regarded as the horse of
the Muses, for it was with a stroke of his hoof that the
inspiring fountain Hippocrene, on Mount Helicon, was caused to
well forth.  In the almost incredible fecundity of his vision,
Spenser at this point is surely alive to the image of such a
horse (i.e. art, poetry) serving to carry a man away from
despair)
Nigh as he drew, they might perceiue his head
Vpstaring stiffe, dismayd with vncouth dread;
Nor life in limbe: and to increase his feares,
About his neck an hempen rope he weares,
But he of rope or armes has now no memoree.
knight)
The _Redcrosse_ knight toward him crossed fast,
There him he finds all sencelesse and aghast,
Whom hardly he from flying forward stayd,
Sir knight, aread who hath ye thus arayd,
For neuer knight I saw in such misseeming plight.
sort)
He answerd nought at all, but adding new
With stony eyes, and hartlesse hollow hew,
Infernall furies, with their chaines vntide.
The gentle knight; who nought to him replide,
And foltring tongue at last these words seemd forth to shake.
For Gods deare loue, Sir knight, do me not stay;
Eft looking backe would faine haue runne away;
The secret cause of his perplexitie:
Could his bloud-frosen hart emboldned bee,
Yet forst, at last he made through silence suddein breach.
And am I now in safetie sure (quoth he)
And is the point of death now turnd fro mee,
Feare nought: (quoth he) no daunger now is +nye?+
(Said he) the which with this vnlucky eye
Me reft from it, had bene partaker of the place.
I lately chaunst (Would I had neuer chaunst)
Sir _Terwin_ hight, that well himselfe aduaunst
But not so happie as mote happie bee:
That him againe lou'd in the least degree:
And ioyd to see her louer languish and lament.
From whom returning sad and comfortlesse,
We met that villen (God from him me blesse)
A man of hell, that cals himselfe _Despaire_:
Of tydings strange, and of aduentures rare:
Inquireth of our states, and of our knightly deedes.
Which when he knew, and felt our feeble harts
Which loue had +launched+ with his deadly darts,
He pluckt from vs all hope of due reliefe,
Then hopelesse hartlesse, gan the cunning thiefe
To me he lent this rope, to him a rustie knife.
animal)
With which sad instrument of hastie death,
A wide way made to let forth liuing breath.
Dismayd with that deformed dismall sight,
Ne yet assur'd of life by you, Sir knight,
But God you neuer let his charmed speeches heare.
How may a man (said he) with idle speach
I wote (quoth he) whom triall late did teach,
His +subtill tongue+, like dropping honny, +mealt'h+
That ere one be aware, by secret stealth
O neuer Sir desire to try his guilefull traine.
Certes (said he) hence shall I neuer rest,
And you Sir knight, whose name mote I request,
I that hight _Treuisan_ (quoth he) will ride
But nor for gold nor +glee+ will I abide
For leuer had I die, then see his deadly face.
Ere long they come, where that same wicked wight
Farre vnderneath a craggie clift ypight,
That still for carrion carcases doth craue:
Shrieking his balefull note, which euer draue
And all about it wandring ghostes did waile and howle.
suggested by the tautology: cf. 101.11:6, but also 303.8:3)
And all about old stockes and stubs of trees,
Did hang vpon the ragged rocky knees;
Whose carcases were +scattered+ on the greene,
That bare-head knight for dread and dolefull teene,
But th'other forst him stay, and comforted in feare.
That darkesome caue they enter, where they find
Musing full sadly in his sullein mind;
Disordred hong about his shoulders round,
Lookt deadly dull, and stared as astound;
+Were+ shronke into his iawes, as he did neuer dine.
His garment nought but many ragged clouts,
The which his naked sides he wrapt abouts;
A drearie corse, whose life away did pas,
That from his wound yet welled fresh alas;
And made an open passage for the gushing flood.
Which piteous spectacle, approuing trew
When as the gentle _Redcrosse_ knight did vew,
Him to auenge, before his bloud were cold,
The author of this fact, we here behold,
With thine owne bloud to price his bloud, here shed in sight.
What franticke fit (quoth he) hath thus distraught
What iustice euer other iudgement taught,
None else to death this man despayring driue,
Is then vniust to each his due to giue?
Or let him die at ease, that liueth here vneath?
Who trauels by the wearie wandring way,
And meetes a flood, that doth his passage stay,
Or free his feet, that in the myre sticke fast?
And fond, that ioyest in the woe thou hast,
Vpon the banke, yet wilt thy selfe not passe the flood?
He there does now enioy eternall rest
And further from it daily wanderest:
That makes fraile flesh to feare the bitter waue?
And layes the soule to sleepe in quiet graue?
Ease after warre, death after life does greatly please.
The knight much wondred at his suddeine wit,
Ne may a man prolong, nor shorten it;
Nor leaue his stand, vntill his Captaine bed.
(Quoth he) knowes best the termes established;
Doth license him depart at sound of morning droome.
he" to introduce a new speaker, seems to indicate, as does the
context, that the Redcross Knight now finishes talking and
Despair begins, though this assumption may not necessarily be
correct)
Is not his deed, what euer thing is donne,
To die againe? all ends that was begonne.
Are written sure, and haue their certaine date.
That holds the world in his still chaunging state,
When houre of death is come, let none aske whence, nor why.
The lenger life, I wote the greater sin,
All those great battels, which thou boasts to win,
Now praysd, hereafter deare thou shalt repent:
Is not enough thy euill life forespent?
The further he doth goe, the further he doth stray.
your evil life has been utterly wasted?  Or, more probably: Has
Then do no further goe, no further stray,
Th'ill to preuent, that life ensewen may.
And giues not rather cause it to forsake?
Paine, hunger, cold, that makes the hart to quake;
All which, and thousands mo do make a loathsome life.
cause to ensue
Thou wretched man, of death hast greatest need,
For neuer knight, that dared warlike deede,
Witnesse the dongeon deepe, wherein of late
And though good lucke prolonged hath thy date,
Into the which hereafter thou maiest happen fall.
personified by Duessa: cf. 101.51:4)
Why then doest thou, {o^} man of sin, desire
Is not the measure of thy sinfull hire
Against the day of wrath, to burden thee?
Thou falsed hast thy faith with periurie,
With whom in all abuse thou hast thy selfe defilde?
Is not he iust, that all this doth behold
Shall he thy sins vp in his knowledge fold,
Is not his law, Let euery sinner die:
Is it not better to doe willinglie,
Death is the end of woes: die soone, O faeries sonne.
The knight was much enmoued with his speach,
And in his conscience made a secret breach,
And to his fresh remembrance did reuerse
That all his manly powres it did disperse,
That oftentimes he quakt, and fainted oftentimes.
sense}
In which amazement, when the Miscreant
Whiles trembling horror did his conscience dant,
To driue him to despaire, and quite to quaile,
The damned ghosts, that doe in torments waile,
With fire and brimstone, which for euer shall remaine.
The sight whereof so throughly him dismaid,
And euer burning wrath before him laid,
Then gan the villein him to ouercraw,
And all that might him to perdition draw;
For death was due to him, that had prouokt Gods ire.
But when as none of them he saw him take,
And gaue it him in hand: his hand did quake,
And troubled bloud though his pale face was seene
As it a running messenger had beene.
He lifted vp his hand, that backe againe did start.
Which when as _Vna_ +saw+, through euery vaine
As in a swowne: but soone +reliu'd+ againe,
And threw it to the ground, enraged rife,
What meanest thou by this reprochfull strife?
With that fire-mouthed Dragon, horrible and bright?
Come, come away, fraile, +feeble+, fleshly wight,
Ne diuelish thoughts dismay thy constant spright.
Why shouldst thou then despeire, that chosen art?
The which doth quench the brond of hellish smart,
Arise, Sir knight arise, and leaue this cursed place.
sense}
So vp he rose, and thence amounted streight.
Would safe depart, for all his subtill sleight,
And with it hung himselfe, vnbid vnblest.
For thousand times he so himselfe had drest,
Till he should die his last, that is eternally.
_Her faithfull knight faire Vna brings
Where he is taught repentance, and
WHat man is he, that boasts of fleshly might,
Which all so soone, as it doth come to fight,
Or from the field most cowardly doth fly?
That thorough grace hath gained victory.
But all the good is Gods, both power and eke will.
By that, which lately hapned, _Vna_ saw,
And all his sinews woxen weake and raw,
Which he endured in his late restraint,
Therefore to cherish him with diets daint,
Till he recouered had his late decayed plight.
There was an auntient house not farre away,
And pure vnspotted life: so well they say
Through wisedome of a matrone graue and hore;
Of wretched soules, and helpe the helpelesse pore:
And all the day in doing good and godly deedes.
Dame _C{ae}lia_ men did her call, as thought
The mother of three daughters, well vpbrought
The eldest two most sober, chast, and wise,
Though spousd, yet wanting wedlocks solemnize;
Was lincked, and by him had many pledges dere.
Arriued there, the dore they find fast lockt;
For feare of many foes: but when they knockt,
He was an aged syre, all hory gray,
Wont on a staffe his feeble steps to stay,
For streight and narrow was the way, which he did show.
Each goodly thing is hardest to begin,
Both plaine, and pleasant to be walked in,
And entertaines with comely courteous glee,
For in his speeches and behauiour hee
And gladly did them guide, till to the Hall they came.
(of free but not noble birth)
There fairely them receiues a gentle Squire,
Right cleanly clad in comely sad attire;
And knew his good to all of each degree,
Does faire entreat; no courting nicetie,
As might become a Squire so great persons to greet.
And afterwards them to his Dame he leades,
Who all this while was busie at her beades:
And toward them full matronely did pace.
Whom well she knew to spring from heauenly race,
As feeling wondrous comfort in her weaker eld.
And her embracing said, {o^} happie earth,
Most vertuous virgin borne of heauenly berth,
From tyrans rage, and euer-dying dread,
Yet ceasest not thy wearie soles to lead,
Or doen thy feeble feet vnweeting hither stray?
Strange thing it is an errant knight to see
That hither turnes his steps.  So few there bee,
All keepe the broad high way, and take delight
And be partakers of their euill plight,
O foolish men, why haste ye to your owne decay?
the word-order here also implies the sense of erring, deviating,
etc.)
Thy selfe to see, and tyred limbs to rest,
And this good knight his way with me addrest,
That vp to heauen is blowne.  The auncient Dame,
And entertaynd them both, as best became,
Ne wanted ought, to shew her bounteous or wise.
Caelia has just described him as "errant")
Thus as they gan of sundry things deuise,
Ylinked arme in arme in louely wise,
They numbred euen steps and equall pace:
Like sunny beames threw from her Christall face,
And round about her head did shine like heauens light.
luminosity}
She was araied all in lilly white,
With wine and water fild vp to the hight,
That horrour made to all, that did behold;
And in her other hand she fast did hold
Wherein darke things were writ, hard to be vnderstood.
Her younger sister, that _Speranza_ hight,
Not all so chearefull seemed she of sight,
Or anguish in her hart, is hard to tell:
Whereon she leaned euer, as befell:
Her stedfast eyes were bent, ne swarued other way.
They seeing _Vna_, towards her gan wend,
Many kind speeches they betwene them spend,
Then to the knight with shamefast modestie
And him salute with well beseeming glee;
And goodly +gan+ discourse of many a noble gest.
Then _Vna_ thus; But she your sister deare,
Or wants she health, or busie is elsewhere?
For she of late is lightned of her wombe,
That her to see should be but troublesome.
But thankt be God, and her encrease so euermore.
Then said the aged _C{oe}lia_, Deare dame,
And labours long, through which ye hither came,
I read you rest, and to your bowres recoyle.
Into a goodly lodge, and gan despoile
His name was meeke _Obedience_ rightfully ared.
Now when their wearie limbes with kindly rest,
Faire _Vna_ gan _Fidelia_ faire request,
That of her heauenly learning he might taste,
She graunted, and that knight so much agraste,
And opened his dull eyes, that light mote in them shine.
And that her sacred Booke, with bloud ywrit,
She vnto him disclosed euery whit,
That weaker wit of man could neuer reach,
That wonder was to heare her goodly speach:
And raise againe to life the hart, that she did thrill.
And when she list poure out her larger spright,
Or backward turne his course from heauens hight;
Dry-shod to passe, she parts the flouds in tway;
She would commaund, themselues to beare away,
Almightie God her gaue such powre, and puissance great.
press, thrust, urge); _also:_ threat, peril
The faithfull knight now grew in litle space,
To such perfection of all heauenly grace,
And mortall life gan loath, as thing forlore,
And prickt with anguish of his sinnes so sore,
So much the dart of sinfull guilt the soule dismayes.
But wise _Speranza_ gaue him comfort sweet,
Vpon her siluer anchor, as was meet;
Made him forget all that _Fidelia_ told.
When him his dearest _Vna_ did behold,
She found her selfe assayld with great perplexitie.
Christ's mental anguish in Gethsemane)
And came to _C{oe}lia_ to declare her smart,
Which sinfull horror workes in wounded hart,
With goodly counsell and aduisement right;
To fetch a Leach, the which had great insight
And well could cure the same; His name was _Patience_.
Who comming to that soule-diseased knight,
Which knowne, and all that noyd his heauie spright,
Of salues and med'cines, which had passing priefe,
By which to ease he him recured briefe,
That he his paine endur'd, as seeming now more light.
But yet the cause and root of all his ill,
Not purg'd nor heald, behind remained still,
Close creeping twixt the marrow and the skin.
Downe in a darkesome lowly place farre in,
And with +streight+ diet tame his stubborne malady.
In ashes and sackcloth he did array
And dieted with fasting euery day,
And made him pray both earely and eke late:
_Amendment_ readie still at hand did wayt,
That soone in him was left no one corrupted iot.
four cardinal "humours" of the body whose proportions, in
medieval physiology, were believed to determine one's mental and
physical qualities}
And bitter _Penance_ with an yron whip,
And sharp _Remorse_ his hart did pricke and nip,
And sad _Repentance_ vsed to embay,
The filthy blots of sinne to wash away.
The man that would not liue, but earst lay at deathes dore.
salt water sore, _1590_
In which his torment often was so great,
And rend his flesh, and his owne synewes eat.
His ruefull shriekes and gronings, often tore
For pitty of his paine and anguish sore;
For well she wist, his crime could else be neuer cleare.
Whom thus recouer'd by wise Patience,
Who ioyous of his cured conscience,
Himselfe to chearish, and consuming thought
By this _Charissa_, late in child-bed brought,
To her faire _Vna_ brought this vnacquainted guest.
becomingly, equitably (when applied to "chearish")
She was a woman in her freshest age,
With goodly grace and comely personage,
Full of great loue, but _Cupids_ wanton snare
Her necke and breasts were euer open bare,
The rest was all in yellow robes arayed still.
A multitude of babes about her hong,
Whom still she fed, whiles they were weake and young,
And on her head she wore a tyre of gold,
Whose passing price vneath was to be told;
Of turtle doues, she sitting in an yuorie chaire.
The knight and _Vna_ entring, faire her greet,
Who them requites with court'sies seeming meet,
Then _Vna_ her besought, to be so good,
Now after all his torment well withstood,
Had past the paines of hell, and long enduring night.
"steadfast")
She was right ioyous of her iust request,
Gan him instruct in euery good behest,
And wrath, and hatred warely to shonne,
And many soules in dolours had fordonne:
From thence to heauen she teacheth him the ready path.
Wherein his weaker wandring steps to guide,
Whose sober lookes her wisedome well descride:
To be both gratious, and eke liberall:
To lead aright, that he should neuer fall
That Mercy in the end his righteous soule might saue.
The godly Matrone by the hand him beares
Scattred with bushy thornes, and ragged breares,
That nothing might his ready passage stay:
Or gan to shrinke, or from the right to stray,
As carefull Nourse her child from falling oft does reare.
Eftsoones vnto an holy Hospitall,
In which seuen Bead-men that had vowed all
Did spend their dayes in doing godly thing:
That by the wearie way were traueiling,
To call +in commers-by+, that needy were and pore.
place of lodging}
though even among the educated the two spellings were
occasionally used indifferently)
= "toiling")
The first of them that eldest was, and best,
As Guardian and Steward of the rest:
And lodging, vnto all that came, and went:
And double quite, for that he on them spent,
Those for Gods sake his dewty was to entertaine.
The second was +as+ Almner of the place,
And thristy giue to drinke, a worke of grace:
Ne car'd to hoord for those, whom he did breede:
Which as a stocke he left vnto his seede;
And had he lesse, yet some he would giue to the pore.
The third had of their wardrobe custodie,
The plumes of pride, and wings of vanitie,
And naked nature seemely to aray;
The images of God in earthly clay;
His owne coate he would cut, and it distribute glad.
The fourth appointed by his office was,
And captiues to redeeme with price of bras,
And though they faultie were, yet well he wayd,
Much more then that, why they in bands were layd,
The faultie soules from thence brought to his heauenly bowre.
The fift had charge sicke persons to attend,
For them most needeth comfort in the end,
The feeble soule departing hence away.
If not well ended at our dying day.
For as the tree does fall, so lyes it euer low.
The sixt had charge of them now being dead,
And deck with dainty flowres their bridall bed,
They might appeare, when he their soules shall saue.
Whose face he made, all beasts to feare, and gaue
Ah dearest God me graunt, I dead be not defould.
The seuenth now after death and buriall done,
And widowes ayd, least they should be vndone:
Ne ought the powre of mighty men did dread
Be wonne their rightfull causes downe to tread:
He did supply their want, and gaue them euer free.
There when the Elfin knight arriued was,
Was guests to welcome, towardes him did pas:
And alwayes led, to her with reuerence rare
And seemely welcome for her did prepare:
Albe _Charissa_ were their chiefest founderesse.
There she awhile him stayes, him selfe to rest,
During which time, in euery good behest
She him instructed with great industree;
That from the first vnto the last degree,
In holy righteousnesse, without rebuke or blame.
Thence forward by that painfull way they pas,
On top whereof a sacred chappell was,
Wherein an aged holy man did lye,
Ne other worldly busines did apply;
Of God and goodnesse was his meditation.
Great grace that old man to him giuen had;
All were his earthly eyen both blunt and bad,
Yet wondrous quick and persant was his spright,
That hill they scale with all their powre and might,
Gan faile, but by her helpe the top at last he wonne.
There they do finde that godly aged Sire,
As hoarie frost with spangles doth attire
Each bone might through his body well be red,
For nought he car'd his carcas long vnfed;
And pyn'd his flesh, to keepe his body low and chast.
Who when these two approching he aspide,
That forst him lay his heauenly thoughts aside;
Whom highly he did reuerence and adore,
They him saluted standing far afore;
And asked, to what end they clomb that tedious height.
What end (quoth +she+) should cause vs take such paine,
Should make his marke, high heauen to attaine?
To that most glorious house, that glistreth bright
Whereof the keyes are to thy hand behight
To shew it to this knight, according his desire.
Thrise happy man, said then the father graue,
And shewes the way, his sinfull soule to saue.
Then thou thy selfe, that was both borne and bred
Thou doest the prayers of the righteous sead
And his auenging wrath to clemencie incline.
Yet +since+ thou bidst, thy pleasure shalbe donne.
That neuer yet was seene of Faeries sonne,
But after labours long, and sad delay,
But first thou must a season fast and pray,
And haue her strength recur'd from fraile infirmitis.
"traueilers" in line 4_
That done, he leads him to the highest Mount;
That bloud-red billowes like a walled front
Till that his army dry-foot through them yod,
With bloudy letters by the hand of God,
He did receiue, whiles flashing fire about him shone.
Or like that sacred hill, whose head full hie,
Is, as it were for endlesse memory
For euer with a flowring girlond crownd:
Through famous Poets verse each where renownd,
Their heauenly notes, and make full many a louely lay.
Muses)
From thence, far off he vnto him did shew
Which to a goodly Citie led his vew;
Of perle and precious stone, that earthly tong
Too high a ditty for my simple song;
Wherein eternall peace and happinesse doth dwell.
As he thereon stood gazing, he might see
From highest heauen, in gladsome companee,
As commonly as friend does with his frend.
What stately building durst so high extend
And what vnknowen nation there empeopled were.
Faire knight (quoth he) _Hierusalem_ that is,
For those to dwell in, that are chosen his,
With +pretious+ bloud, which cruelly was spilt
That for the sinnes of all the world was kilt:
More deare vnto their God, then younglings to their dam.
Till now, said then the knight, I weened well,
In which that fairest _Faerie Queene_ doth dwell
And that bright towre all built of christall cleene,
But now by proofe all otherwise I weene;
And this bright Angels towre quite dims that towre of glas.
pure and uncluttered in style}
"Nonesuch", "Nonpareil", etc.  Possibly identifiable as
Westminster Abbey or the Queen's Palace of Richmond)
Most trew, then said the holy aged man;
The fairest peece, that eye beholden can:
That couet in th'immortall booke of fame
And doen their seruice to that soueraigne Dame,
For she is heauenly borne, and heauen may iustly vaunt.
And thou faire ymp, sprong out from English race,
Well worthy doest thy seruice for her grace,
But when thou famous victorie hast wonne,
Thenceforth the suit of earthly conquest shonne,
For bloud can nought but sin, and wars but sorrowes yield.
Then seeke this path, that I to thee presage,
Then +peaceably thy+ painefull pilgrimage
Where is for thee ordaind a blessed end:
Shalt be a Saint, and thine owne nations frend
Saint _George_ of mery England, the signe of victoree.
Vnworthy wretch (quoth he) of so great grace,
These that haue it attaind, were in like cace
But deeds of armes must I at last be faine,
What need of armes, where peace doth ay remaine,
As for loose loues +are+ vaine, and vanish into nought.
men, and liued in like paine. _1590_
grace")
O let me not (quoth he) +then turne+ againe
But let me here for aye in peace remaine,
That nothing may my present hope empare.
Forgo that royall maides bequeathed care,
Till from her cursed foe thou haue her freely quit.
by the Faery Queen; see I:152-81)
Then shall I soone, (quoth he) so God me grace,
And shortly backe returne vnto this place,
But now aread, old father, why of late
Whom all a Faeries sonne +doen nominate+?
Sith to thee is vnknowne the cradle of thy brood.
For well I wote, thou springst from ancient race
And many bloudie battailes fought in +place+
And vanquisht them, vnable to withstand:
There as thou slepst in tender swadling band,
Such men do Chaungelings call, so chaungd by Faeries theft.
statement at odds with the succeeding account (e.g. in 210) of
English genealogy
Thence she thee brought into this Faerie lond,
Where thee a Ploughman all vnweeting fond,
And brought thee vp in ploughmans state to byde,
Till prickt with courage, and thy forces pryde,
And proue thy puissaunt armes, as seemes thee best became.
ploughman or to "you", as at 110.65:6)
in 1590)
O holy Sire (quoth he) how shall I quight
That hast my name and nation red aright,
This said, adowne he looked to the ground,
Through passing brightnesse, which did quite confound
So darke are earthly things compard to things diuine.
At last whenas himselfe he gan to find,
Who him awaited still with pensiue mind.
He thence departing gaue for his paines hyre.
And after litle rest, gan him desire,
So leaue they take of _C{oe}lia_, and her daughters three.
_The knight with that old Dragon fights
The third him ouerthrowes, and gayns
HIgh time now gan it wex for _Vna_ faire,
And their forwasted kingdome to repaire:
With hartie words her knight she gan to cheare,
Deare knight, as deare, as euer knight was deare,
High heauen behold the tedious toyle, ye for me take.
Now are we come vnto my natiue soyle,
Here haunts that feend, and does his dayly spoyle,
And euer ready for your foeman fell.
And striue your excellent selfe to excell;
Aboue all knights on earth, that batteill vndertake.
+And+ pointing forth, lo yonder is (said she)
For dread of that huge feend emprisond +be+
Whose sight my feeble soule doth greatly cheare:
The watchman wayting tydings glad to heare,
Vnto you bring, to ease you of your misery.
_This stanza was added in 1596_
With that they heard a roaring hideous sound,
And seemd vneath to shake the stedfast ground.
Where +stretcht+ he lay vpon the sunny +side,+
But all so soone, as he from far descride
He rousd himselfe full blith, and hastned them vntill.
description; or perhaps the dragon does not as yet choose to
recognize the newcomers as a threat)
Then bad the knight +his+ Lady yede aloofe,
From whence she might behold that battailles proof
She him obayd, and turnd a little wyde.
Fayre ympe of _Ph{oe}bus_, and his aged bride,
That warlike hands ennoblest with immortall name;
accounts he is the leader of the choir of Muses, and receives
the name Musagetes as a result.  According to _Myth._ 4.10, the
Muses are the children of Apollo, rather than of Jupiter)
O gently come into my feeble brest,
Wherewith the martiall troupes thou doest infest,
That nought their kindled courage may +aswage,+
The God of warre with his fiers equipage
And +scared+ nations doest with horrour sterne astownd.
Faire Goddesse lay that furious fit aside,
And Briton fields with Sarazin bloud bedyde,
That with their horrour heauen and earth did ring,
But now a while let downe that haughtie string,
That I this man of God his godly armes may blaze.
public virtues; see I:92-4)
intensive, hence:_ soaked
encompass
praising rather than being worthy of praise, as the modern sense
implies}
music}
By this the dreadfull Beast drew nigh to hand,
That with his largenesse measured much land,
As mountaine doth the valley ouercast.
His body monstrous, horrible, and +vast+,
Was swolne with wrath, and poyson, and with bloudy gore.
usage not recorded, in _OED_, until 1725)
the dragon reared his body high afore ( = before, in front).  But
if "reared" is intransitive, a comma is wanted after "afore": "he
reared high afore, His body monstrous" etc.)
And ouer, all with brasen scales was armd,
That nought mote perce, ne might his corse be harmd
Which as an Eagle, seeing pray appeare,
So shaked he, that horrour was to heare,
Such noyse his rouzed scales did send vnto the knight.
an intimate knowledge of falconry and its language in this canto,
as elsewhere in the poem)
His flaggy wings when forth he did display,
Is gathered full, and worketh speedy way:
Were like mayne-yardes, with flying canuas lynd,
And there by force vnwonted passage find,
And all the heauens stood still amazed with his threat.
_King Lear_ II iv 40)
His huge long tayle wound vp in hundred foldes,
Whose wreathed boughts when euer he vnfoldes,
Bespotted +as+ with shields of red and blacke,
And of three furlongs does but litle lacke;
Both deadly sharpe, that sharpest steele exceeden farre.
But stings and sharpest steele did far exceed
Dead was it sure, as sure as death in deed,
Or what within his reach he euer drawes.
Does tremble: for his deepe deuouring iawes
Through which into his darke abisse all rauin fell.
And that more wondrous was, in either iaw
In which yet trickling bloud and gobbets raw
That sight thereof bred cold congealed feare:
A cloud of smoothering smoke and sulphur seare
That all the ayre about with smoke and stench did fill.
His blazing eyes, like two bright shining shields,
As two broad Beacons, set in open fields,
And warning giue, that enemies conspyre,
So flam'd his eyne with rage and rancorous yre:
Those glaring lampes were set, that made a dreadfull shade.
beacon-fires set up along the English cliffs to warn of the
approach of the Spanish Armada, lit on 29 July 1588)
So dreadfully he towards him did pas,
And often bounding on the brused gras,
Eftsoones he gan aduance his haughtie crest,
And shoke his scales to battell readie drest;
As bidding bold defiance to his foeman neare.
The knight gan fairely couch his steadie speare,
The pointed steele arriuing rudely theare,
But glauncing by forth passed forward right;
The wrathfull beast about him turned light,
With his long tayle, that horse and man to ground did rush.
Both horse and man vp lightly rose againe,
But th'idle stroke yet backe recoyld in vaine,
Exceeding rage enflam'd the furious beast,
For neuer felt his imperceable brest
Yet had he prou'd the powre of many a puissant knight.
Then with his wauing wings displayed wyde,
And with strong flight did forcibly diuide
Her flitting partes, and element +vnsound+,
With his broad sayles, about him soared round:
Snatcht vp both horse and man, to beare them quite away.
Long he them bore aboue the subiect plaine,
Till struggling strong did him at last constraine,
As hagard hauke presuming to contend
His wearie pounces all in vaine doth spend,
Which comming downe to ground, does free it selfe by fight.
used of birds of prey}
He so disseized of his gryping grosse,
In his bras-plated body to embosse,
Wherewith the stiffe beame quaked, as affrayd,
Close vnder his left wing, then broad displayd.
That with the vncouth smart the Monster lowdly cryde.
hold; _or perhaps an amalgam of these ideas, as:_ heavy and
strongly gripped load
He cryde, as raging seas are wont to rore,
The rolling billowes beat the ragged shore,
And greedie gulfe does gape, as he would eat
Then gin the blustring brethren boldly threat,
And boystrous battell make, each other to auenge.
of ancient philosophy, the others being Air and Fire)
The steely head stucke fast still in his flesh,
And quite a sunder broke.  Forth flowed fresh
That drowned all the land, whereon he stood;
Trebly augmented was his furious mood
That flames of fire he threw forth from his large nosethrill.
His hideous tayle then hurled he about,
Of his froth-fomy steed, whose courage stout
Himselfe in streighter bandes too rash implyes,
To throw his rider: who can quickly ryse
For that reprochfull fall right fowly he disdaynd.
about)
indignation
And fiercely tooke his trenchand blade in hand,
That nothing seemd the puissance could withstand:
But his more hardned crest was armd so well,
Yet so extremely did the buffe him quell,
But when he saw them come, he did them still forsake.
The knight was +wrath+ to see his stroke beguyld,
But backe againe the sparckling steele recoyld,
As if in Adamant rocke it had bene pight.
And of so fierce and forcible despight,
But his late wounded wing vnseruiceable found.
Then full of griefe and anguish vehement,
And from his wide deuouring ouen sent
Him all amazd, and almost made affeard:
And through his armour all his bodie seard,
But thought his armes to leaue, and helmet to vnlace.
Not that great Champion of the antique world,
And hath for twelue huge labours high extold,
When him the poysoned garment did enchaunt
As did this knight twelue thousand dolours daunt,
That erst him goodly arm'd, now most of all him harm'd.
champion as did this knight twelve thousand dolours daunt")
Nessus, by which Hercules was killed (see _Met._ 9.134 ff.))
Faint, wearie, sore, emboyled, grieued, brent
That neuer man such mischiefes did torment;
But death will neuer come, when needes require.
He cast to suffer him no more respire,
And him so strongly stroke, that to the ground him feld.
boiling with rage: SUS}
It fortuned (as faire it then befell)
Of auncient time there was a springing well,
Full of great vertues, and for med'cine good.
That happie land, and all with innocent blood
_The well of life_, ne yet his vertues had forgot.
For vnto life the dead it could restore,
Those that with sicknesse were infected sore,
Renew, as +one+ were borne that very day.
And th'English _Bath_, and eke the german _Spau_,
Into the same the knight backe ouerthrowen, fell.
(The word-order in line 6 is exceptionally convoluted: "This did
excel both Siloam and Jordan")
(_2 Kings_ 5.1-14) and in which Christ was baptized by John
(_Matt._ 3))
Deucalion and Pyrrha (_Met._ 1.369-70); and for washing and
whitening fleeces (Pliny, _Hist. Nat_. 2.106))
_Epistles_ 1.16:13))
Now gan the golden _Ph{oe}bus_ for to steepe
And his faint steedes watred in Ocean deepe,
When that infernall Monster, hauing kest
Can high aduance his broad discoloured brest,
And clapt his yron wings, as victor he did dwell.
day's travel, or any journey)
stained, dingy
prey)
Which when his pensiue Ladie saw from farre,
As weening that the sad end of the warre,
That feared chance from her to turne away;
All night she watcht, ne once adowne would lay
But praying still did wake, and waking did lament.
The morrow next gan early to appeare,
But early ere the morrow next gan reare
Vp rose the gentle virgin from her place,
Her loued knight to moue his manly pace:
Since late she saw him fall before his enemy.
At last she saw, where he vpstarted braue
As Eagle fresh out of the Ocean waue,
And deckt himselfe with feathers youthly gay,
His newly budded pineons to assay,
So new this new-borne knight to battell new did rise.
submersion in water)
Whom when the damned feend so fresh did +spy,+
And doubted, whether his late enemy
+He, now+ to proue his late renewed might,
Vpon his crested scalpe so sore did smite,
The deadly dint his dulled senses all dismaid.
I wote not, whether the reuenging steele
Wherein he fell, or sharper edge did feele,
Or other secret vertue did ensew;
Ne molten mettall in his bloud embrew:
By subtilty, nor slight, nor might, nor mighty charme.
dragon's blood)
The cruell wound enraged him so sore,
As hundred ramping Lyons seem'd to rore,
Then gan he tosse aloft his stretched traine,
That to his force to yeelden it was faine;
That high trees ouerthrew, and rocks in peeces tore.
The same aduauncing high aboue his head,
That to the earth him droue, as stricken dead,
The mortall sting his angry needle shot
Where fast it stucke, ne would there out be got:
Ne might his ranckling paine with patience be appeasd.
But yet more mindfull of his honour deare,
From loathed soile he can him lightly reare,
Which when in vaine he tryde with struggeling,
And strooke so strongly, that the knotty +string+
Fiue ioynts thereof he hewd, and but the stump him left.
Hart cannot thinke, what outrage, and what cryes,
The hell-bred beast threw forth vnto the skyes,
Then fraught with rancour, and engorged ire,
And gathering vp himselfe out of the mire,
Vpon his sunne-bright shield, and gript it fast withall.
Much was the man encombred with his hold,
Ne wist yet, how his talants to vnfold;
To plucke a bone, then from his cruell claw
Thrise he assayd it from his foot to draw,
It booted nought to thinke, to robbe him of his pray.
Tho when he saw no power might preuaile,
Wherewith he fiercely did his foe assaile,
That glauncing fire out of the yron plaid;
When heauie hammers on the wedge are swaid;
One of his grasping feete, him to defend thereby.
cutting red-hot iron; also: ingot of gold or silver}
The other foot, fast fixed on his +shield+
To loose, ne yet the warlike pledge to yield,
That nought so wondrous puissance might sustaine;
And made such way, that hewd it quite in twaine;
But hong still on the shield, as it at first was pight.
For griefe thereof, and diuelish despight,
Huge flames, that dimmed all the heauens light,
As burning _Aetna_ from his boyling stew
And ragged ribs of mountaines molten new,
That all the land with stench, and heauen with horror choke.
presence of ghosts, death, or Satan}
century; see also _Aen._ 3.571-7)
The heate whereof, and harmefull pestilence
A little backward for his best defence,
Which he from hellish entrailes did expire.
As he recoyled backward, in the mire
And downe he fell, with dread of shame sore terrifide.
There grew a goodly tree him faire beside,
As they in pure vermilion had beene dide,
For happie life to all, which thereon fed,
Great God it planted in that blessed sted
+The tree of life+, the crime of our first fathers fall.
crystalline mercuric sulphide, used as a dye}
disobediently eaten (3.6-7) from the tree of knowledge, was
banished by God from the Garden of Eden for fear that he would
also taste the fruit of the tree of life.  Adam thus laid himself
open to the accusation of his descendants that he had denied them
the opportunity to dwell in the Garden of Eden)
In all the world like was not to be found,
And freely sprong out of the fruitfull ground,
Till that dread Dragon all did ouerthrow.
Whereof who so did eat, eftsoones did know
That tree through one mans fault hath doen vs all to dy.
is, these lines of _FQ_)
From that first tree forth flowd, as from a well,
And daintie deare, which on the ground still fell,
As it had deawed bene with timely raine:
And deadly woundes could +heale+ and reare againe
Into that same he fell: which did from death him saue.
For nigh thereto the euer damned beast
And all that life preserued, did detest:
By this the drouping day-light gan to fade,
Who with her sable mantle gan to shade
And high her burning torch set vp in heauen bright.
When gentle _Vna_ saw the second fall
And faint through losse of bloud, mou'd not at all,
Besmeard with pretious Balme, whose vertuous might
Againe she stricken was with sore affright,
And watch the noyous night, and wait for ioyous day.
The ioyous day gan early to appeare,
Of aged _Tithone_ gan her selfe to reare,
Her golden lockes for haste were loosely shed
Clymbe to her charet, all with flowers +spred;+
With merry note her loud salutes the mounting larke.
end of the knight's spiritual journey)
who each day drives his chariot across the sky)
Then freshly vp arose the doughtie knight,
And did himselfe to battell readie dight;
To haue deuourd, so soone as day he spyde,
As if late fight had nought him damnifyde,
Nathlesse with wonted rage he him aduaunced neare.
And in his first encounter, gaping wide,
And rusht vpon him with outragious pride;
Perforce rebutted backe.  The weapon bright
Ran through his mouth with so importune might,
And back retyrd, his life bloud forth with all did draw.
So downe he fell, and forth his life did breath,
So downe he fell, that th'earth him vnderneath
So downe he fell, as an huge rockie clift,
With dreadfull +poyse+ is from the mayneland rift,
So downe he fell, and like an heaped mountaine lay.
The knight himselfe euen trembled at his fall,
And his deare Ladie, that beheld it all,
But yet at last, when as the direfull feend
She nigher drew, and saw that ioyous end:
That had atchieu'd so great a conquest by his might.
_Faire Vna to the Redcrosse knight
Though false Duessa it to barre
BEhold I see the hauen nigh at hand,
Vere the maine shete, and beare vp with the land,
And seemeth safe from stormes, that may offend;
Must landed be, now at her iourneyes end:
Till merry wind and weather call her thence away.
adjusting its inclination or volume}
Scarsely had _Ph{oe}bus_ in the glooming East
Ne reard aboue the earth his flaming creast,
That signe of last outbreathed life did seeme,
Who thereby dead that balefull Beast did deeme,
To tell, how he had seene the Dragons fatall +fall.+
Vprose with hastie ioy, and feeble speed
And looked forth, to weet, if true indeede
Which whenas true by tryall he out +found+,
Which long time had bene shut, and out of hond
For dead now was their foe, which them forrayed late.
Then gan triumphant Trompets sound on hie,
Of their new ioy, and happie victorie
And fast imprisoned in sieged fort.
To him assembled with one full consort,
From whose eternall bondage now they were releast.
Forth came that auncient Lord and aged Queene,
And sad habiliments right well beseene;
Of sage and sober Peres, all grauely gownd;
Of tall young men, all hable armes to sownd,
Glad signe of victorie and peace in all their land.
"But now" at line 8:_ feats of arms
view of "But now" at line 8:_ celebrate, proclaim, make known
Vnto that doughtie Conquerour they came,
Their Lord and Patrone loud did him proclame,
Soone after them all dauncing on a row
As fresh as flowres in medow greene do grow,
And in their hands sweet Timbrels all vpheld on hight.
And them before, the fry of children young
And to the Maydens sounding +tymbrels+ +sung+
And made delightfull musicke all the way,
As faire _Diana_ in fresh sommers +day,+
Some wrestle, some do run, some bathe in christall flood.
So she beheld those maydens meriment
Themselues to ground with gratious humblesse bent,
Lifting to heauen her euerlasting fame:
And crowned her twixt earnest and twixt game;
Did seeme such, as she was, a goodly maiden Queene.
name being honourable)
cf. 112.5:3)
And +after,+ all the raskall many ran,
To see the face of that victorious man:
And gazd vpon with gaping wonderment.
Stretcht on the ground in +monstrous+ large extent,
Ne durst approch him nigh, to touch, or once assay.
Some feard, and fled; some feard and well it faynd;
Warnd him not touch, for yet perhaps remaynd
Or in his wombe might lurke some hidden nest
Another said, that in his eyes did rest
Another said, he saw him moue his eyes indeed.
One mother, when as her foolehardie chyld
Halfe dead through feare, her litle babe reuyld,
How can I tell, but that his +talants+ may
So diuersly themselues in vaine they fray;
To proue how many acres he did spread of land.
Thus flocked all the folke him round about,
Being arriued, where that champion stout
Him goodly greetes, and faire does entertaine,
And thousand thankes him yeelds for all his paine.
Her dearely doth imbrace, and kisseth manifold.
condition, right, etc.: a legal term)
And after to his Pallace he them brings,
And all the way the ioyous people sings,
Whence mounting vp, they find purueyance meet
And all the floore was vnderneath their feet
On which they lowly sit, and fitting purpose frame.
What needs me tell their feast and goodly guize,
What needes of daintie dishes to deuize,
My narrow leaues cannot in them containe
Yet was their manner then but bare and plaine:
Such proud luxurious pompe is swollen vp but late.
done; also: the courses served}
Then when with meates and drinkes of euery kinde
That auncient Lord gan fit occasion finde,
Which in his trauell him befallen had,
Who then with vtt'rance graue, and count'nance sad,
Discourst his voyage long, according his request.
Great +pleasure+ mixt with pittifull regard,
Whyles they his pittifull aduentures heard,
And often blame the too importune fate,
For neuer gentle knight, as he of late,
And all the while salt teares bedeawd the hearers cheaks.
Then said +the+ royall Pere in sober wise;
From first to last in your late enterprise,
For neuer liuing man, I weene, so sore
But +since+ now safe ye seised haue the shore,
Let vs deuize of ease and euerlasting rest.
Ah dearest Lord, said then that doughty knight,
For by the faith, which I to armes haue plight,
As that your daughter can ye well aduize,
And her to serue six yeares in warlike wize,
Therefore I ought craue pardon, till I there haue beene.
Vnhappie falles that hard necessitie,
And vowed foe of my felicitie;
But +since+ that band ye cannot now release,
Soone as the terme of those six yeares shall cease,
The marriage to accomplish vowd betwixt you twain.
Which for my part I couet to performe,
That who so kild that monster most deforme,
Should haue mine onely daughter to his Dame,
Therefore +since+ now to thee perteines the same,
Both daughter and eke kingdome, lo I yield to thee.
Then forth he called that his daughter faire,
His onely daughter, and his onely heyre;
As bright as doth the morning starre appeare
To tell +that+ dawning day is +drawing+ neare,
So faire and fresh that Lady shewd her selfe in sight.
So faire and fresh, as freshest flowre in May;
And widow-like sad wimple throwne away,
Whiles on her wearie iourney she did ride;
All lilly white, withoutten spot, or pride,
But neither silke nor siluer therein did appeare.
face and neck}
The blazing brightnesse of her beauties beame,
To tell, were as to striue against the streame.
Her heauenly lineaments for to enchace.
All were she dayly with himselfe in place,
Oft had he seene her faire, but neuer so faire dight.
a precious stone)
So fairely dight, when she in presence came,
And bowed low, that her right well became,
Who with great wisedome, and graue eloquence
With flying speede, and seeming great pretence,
A Messenger with letters, which his message said.
sovereign receives visitors)
All in the open hall amazed stood,
And wondred at his breathlesse hastie mood.
Till fast before the king he did alight;
And kist the ground, whereon his foot was pight;
Which he disclosing, red thus, as the paper spake.
banquets and receptions}
reach}
revealing to the knowledge of others)
To thee, most mighty king of _Eden_ faire,
The wofull daughter, and forsaken heire
And bids thee be aduized for the best,
Of wedlocke to that new vnknowen guest:
Vnto another loue, and to another land.
To me sad mayd, or rather widow sad,
And sacred pledges he both gaue, and had,
Witnesse the burning Altars, which he swore,
Which though he hath polluted oft +of+ yore,
And them coniure t'auenge this shamefull iniury.
the context here also implies the sense of erring, deviating)
words}
Therefore +since+ mine he is, or free or bond,
Withhold, O soueraine Prince, your hasty hond
Ne weene my right with strength adowne to tread,
For truth is strong, +her+ rightfull cause to plead,
So bids thee well to fare, Thy neither friend, nor foe, _Fidessa_.
When he these bitter byting words had red,
That still he sate long time astonished
At last his solemne silence thus he brake,
Redoubted knight, that for mine onely sake
Let nought be hid from me, that ought to be exprest.
What meane these bloudy vowes, and idle threats,
What heauens? what altars? what enraged heates
My conscience cleare with guilty bands would bind?
But if your selfe, Sir knight, ye faultie find,
With crime do not it couer, but disclose the same.
To whom the _Redcrosse_ knight this answere sent,
Till well ye wote by graue intendiment,
With breach of loue, and loyalty betrayd.
I lately traueild, that vnwares I strayd
That day should faile me, ere I had them all declard.
There did I find, or rather I was found
_Fidessa_ hight the falsest Dame on ground,
That easie was +t'inuegle+ weaker sight:
Too false and strong for earthly skill or might,
And to my foe betrayd, when least I feared ill.
Then stepped forth the goodly royall Mayd,
With sober countenaunce thus to him sayd;
The secret treasons, which of late I know
She onely she it is, that earst did throw
That death him did awaite in dayly wretchednesse.
And now it seemes, that she suborned hath
To worke new woe and +improuided+ scath,
Wherein she vsed hath the practicke paine
Whom if ye please for to discouer plaine,
The falsest man aliue; +who+ tries shall find no lesse.
The king was greatly moued at her speach,
Bad on that Messenger rude hands to reach.
Attacht that faitor false, and bound him strait:
As chained Beare, whom cruell dogs do bait,
And often semblaunce made to scape out of their hand.
But they him layd full low in dungeon deepe,
And with continuall watch did warely keepe;
He could escape fowle death or deadly paines?
He gan renew the late forbidden +banes+,
With sacred rites and vowes for euer to abyde.
His owne two hands the holy knots did knit,
His owne two hands, for such a turne most fit,
And holy water thereon sprinckled wide;
And sacred lampe in secret chamber hide,
For feare of euill fates, but burnen euer bright.
hymeneal torch (cf. _Epithalamion_ 27, _Muiopotmos_ 293)
Then gan they sprinckle all the posts with wine,
They all perfumde with frankencense diuine,
That all the house did sweat with great aray:
Her curious skill, the warbling notes to play,
The whiles one sung a song of loue and iollity.
_Epithalamion_ 253)
During the which there was an heauenly noise
Like as it had bene many an Angels voice,
In their trinall triplicities on hye;
Proceeded, yet eachone felt secretly
And rauished with rare impression in his +sprite+.
of St Thomas Aquinas and others.  The three Hierarchies are each
divided into three Orders of Choirs: Seraphim, Cherubim, Thrones;
Dominations, Virtues, Powers; Principalities, Archangels, Angels)
Great ioy was made that day of young and old,
That their exceeding merth may not be told:
The vsuall ioyes at knitting of loues band.
Possessed of his Ladies hart and hand,
+His+ heart did seeme to melt in pleasures manifold.
Her ioyous presence and sweet company
Ne wicked enuie, +ne+ vile gealosy
Yet swimming in that sea of blisfull ioy,
In case he could that monstrous beast destroy,
The which he shortly did, and _Vna_ left to mourne.
Now strike your sailes ye iolly Mariners,
Where we must land some of our passengers,
Here she a while may make her safe abode,
And wants supplide.  And then againe abroad
Well may she speede and fairely finish her intent.
safely anchor}
_Of Temperaunce._
RIght well I wote most mighty Soueraine,
Of some th'aboundance of an idle braine
Rather then matter of iust memory,
Where is that happy land of Faery,
But vouch antiquities, which no body can know.
But let that man with better sence aduize,
And dayly how through hardy enterprize,
Which to late age were neuer mentioned.
Or who in venturous vessell measured
Or fruitfullest _Virginia_ who did euer vew?
Yet all these were, when no man did them know;
And later times things more vnknowne shall show.
That nothing is, but that which he hath seene?
What if in euery other starre vnseene
He wonder would much more: yet such to some appeare.
Of Faerie lond yet if he more inquire,
He may it find; ne let him then admire,
That no'te without an hound fine footing trace.
In this faire mirrhour maist behold thy face,
And in this antique Image thy great auncestry.
The which O pardon me thus to enfold
That feeble eyes your glory may behold,
But would be dazled with exceeding light.
The braue aduentures of this Faery knight
In whom great rule of Temp'raunce goodly doth appeare.
_Guyon by Archimage abusd,
Findes Mordant and Amauia slaine
from "Gihon", the river in Eden associated with temperance; from
"gyon", meaning "wrestler"; or from "Guy", the name of various
romance heroes)
also signifies "Death-giver")
THat cunning Architect of cancred guile,
For falsed letters and suborned wile,
To beene departed out of _Eden_ lands,
His artes he moues, and out of +caytiues+ +hands+
His shackles emptie left, him selfe escaped cleene.
(improving on the sense of 1596, which may well be a misprint)_
rhyme_
Appendix)
And forth he fares full of malicious mind,
Where euer he that godly knight may find,
Sith _Vna_ now he algates must forgoe,
To +natiue+ crowne and kingdome late ygoe:
As weather-beaten ship arriu'd on happie shore.
Him therefore now the obiect of his spight
By forged treason, or by open fight
Thereto his subtile engins he does +bend+
With thousand other sleights: for well he kend,
For hardly could +be+ hurt, who was already stong.
Still as he went, he craftie stales did +lay,+
And priuie spials plast in all his way,
To ketch him at +a vantage+ in his snares.
By triall of his former harmes and cares,
The fish that once was caught, new bait will hardly bite.
Nath'lesse th'Enchaunter would not spare his paine,
Which when he long awaited had in vaine,
For to all good he enimy was still.
Faire marching vnderneath a shady hill,
That from his head no place appeared to his feete.
the object of "meet"; the knight is the subject of "fortuned")
horseman}
His carriage was full comely and vpright,
But yet so sterne and terrible in sight,
He was an Elfin borne of noble state,
Well could he tourney and in lists debate,
When with king _Oberon_ he came to Faerie land.
tournament)
tilting-ground)
Oberon's successor)
Him als accompanyd vpon the way
Of ripest yeares, and haires all hoarie gray,
Least his long way his aged limbes should tire:
He seemd to be a sage and sober sire,
Who taught his trampling steed with equall steps to tread.
palm-leaf or palm-branch as a token; also: an itinerant monk}
etc.)
Such whenas _Archimago_ did them view,
Eftsoones vntwisting his deceiptfull clew,
And +with faire+ countenance and flattring stile,
Faire sonne of _Mars_, that seeke with warlike +spoile,+
Vouchsafe to stay your steed for humble misers sake.
He stayd his steed for humble misers sake,
Who feigning then in euery limbe to quake,
With piteous mone his percing speach gan paint;
Whom late I left in +langourous+ constraint?
To tell this ruefull tale; thy sight could win thee grace.
opposed to here}
Or rather would, O would it so had chaunst,
When that lewd ribauld with vile lust aduaunst
To spoile her daintie corse so faire and sheene,
With liuing eye more faire was neuer seene,
Witnesse ye heauens, whom she in vaine to helpe did call.
fellow}
How may it be, (said then the knight halfe wroth,)
None but that saw (quoth he) would weene for troth,
Her looser golden lockes he rudely rent,
Against her snowy brest +he+ fiercely bent,
Toung hates to tell the rest, that eye to see abhord.
Therewith amoued from his sober mood,
And doen the heauens afford him vitall food?
Ne yet hath any knight his courage crackt.
Or by what meanes may I his footing tract?
The stricken Deare doth chalenge by the bleeding wound.
first cry at finding the scent}
He staid not lenger talke, but with fierce ire
To seeke that knight, where him that craftie Squire
Where sate a gentle Lady all alone,
Wringing her hands, and making piteous mone;
And her faire face with teares was fowly blubbered.
The knight approching nigh, thus to her said,
Great pittie is to see you thus dismaid,
For thy appease your griefe and heauie plight,
For if he liue, that hath you doen +despight,+
Or else his wrong with greater puissance maintaine.
self-evident}
Which when she heard, as in despightfull wise,
And offred hope of comfort did despise:
And scratcht her face with ghastly dreriment,
But hid her visage, and her head downe bent,
As if her hart with sorrow had transfixed beene.
head which she hid)
Till her that Squire bespake, Madame my +liefe+,
But doe vouchsafe now to receiue reliefe,
For what bootes it to weepe and to wayment,
And the weake mind with double woe +torment?+
Her voluntarie paine, and feele some secret ease.
Eftsoone she said, Ah gentle trustie Squire,
Or why should euer I henceforth +desire,+
Sith that false Traytour did my honour reaue?
I read the man, that euer would deceaue
Death were too little paine for such a foule despight.
But now, faire Ladie, comfort to you make,
That short reuenge the man may ouertake,
Certes (saide she) I wote not how he hight,
Whose sides with dapled circles weren dight;
He bore a bloudie Crosse, that quartred all the field.
Now by my head (said _Guyon_) much I muse,
Or euer gentle Damzell so abuse:
A right good knight, and true of word ywis:
When armes he swore, and streight did enterpris
In which he hath great glorie wonne, as I heare tell.
her parents; see Book I)
Nathlesse he shortly shall againe be tryde,
Else be ye sure he dearely shall abyde,
All wrongs haue mends, but no amends of shame.
And see the saluing of your blotted name.
For she was inly glad her purpose so to gaine.
fain: become glad
Her purpose was not such, as she did faine,
But vnder simple shew and semblant plaine
As a chast Virgin, that had wronged beene:
To cloke her guile with sorrow and sad teene;
To be her Squire, and do her seruice well aguisd.
Her late forlorne and naked he had found,
Lurking in rockes and caues farre vnder ground,
To hide her shame and loathly filthinesse;
And borrow'd beautie spoyld.  Her nathelesse
Did thus reuest, and deckt with due habiliments.
implies)
For all he did, was to deceiue good knights,
To slug in slouth and sensuall delights,
And now exceeding griefe him ouercame,
Therefore this craftie engine he did frame,
Of such, as vertues like mote vnto him allye.
heraldic bearing, the red cross)
So now he _Guyon_ guides an vncouth way
Into a pleasant dale, that lowly lay
The valley did with coole shade ouercast;
By which there sate a knight with helme vnlast,
After his trauell long, and labours manifold.
Loe yonder he, cryde _Archimage_ alowd,
And now he doth himselfe in secret shrowd,
But vaine: for ye shall dearely do him rew,
Which we farre off will here abide to vew.
That streight against that knight his speare he did addresse.
Who seeing him from farre so fierce to pricke,
And in the rest his readie speare did sticke;
He gan rencounter him in equall race.
When suddenly that warriour gan abace
Had him +betidde+, or hidden daunger did entrap.
take up (shield and lance, etc.)
in a tourney charge toward one another, here used fig.}
And cryde, Mercie Sir knight, and mercie Lord,
That had almost committed crime abhord,
Whiles cursed steele against that badge I bent,
Which on your shield is set for ornament:
Who prickt with courage kene, did cruell battell breath.
But when he heard him speake, streight way he knew
Ah deare Sir _Guyon_, +well+ becommeth you,
Whose hastie hand so farre from reason strayd,
On that faire image of that heauenly Mayd,
Your court'sie takes on you anothers due offence.
So bene they both +attone+, and doen vpreare
Goodly comportance each to other beare,
Then said the _Redcrosse_ knight, Now mote I weet,
And fell intent ye did at earst me meet;
Great cause, I weene, you guided, or some vncouth chaunce.
onslaught}
Certes (said he) well mote I shame to tell
A false infamous faitour late befell
And playnd of grieuous outrage, which he red
Which to auenge, he to this place me led,
And now is fled; foule shame him follow, where he went.
So can he turne his earnest vnto game,
By this his aged guide in presence came;
Eft soones of him had perfect cognizance,
And said, +faire+ sonne, God giue you happie chance,
Wherewith aboue all knights ye goodly seeme aguizd.
(sb.) = "design", and, specifically in heraldry, "emblem")
Ioy may you haue, and euerlasting fame,
For which enrolled is your glorious name
Where you a Saint with Saints your seat haue wonne:
Must now anew begin, like race to runne;
And to the wished hauen bring thy weary barke.
sea or a river (cf. esp. 212); course of events; course of a
narrative}
Palmer, (him answered the _Redcrosse_ knight)
Who made my hand the organ of his might;
For all I did, I did but as I ought.
Well mote yee thee, as well can wish your thought,
For well ye worthie bene for worth and gentle thewes.
play; tableau or tableaux from such a play.  The same word is
used in the dedicatory sonnet to Charles Howard at I:537}
So courteous conge both did giue and take,
Then _Guyon_ forward gan his voyage make,
Still he him guided ouer dale and hill,
His race with reason, and with words his will,
And suffred not in wrath his hastie steps to stray.
Grosart_
In this faire wize they traueild long yfere,
Of which he honour still away did beare,
At last as chaunst them by a forest side
They heard a ruefull voice, that dearnly cride
Which to attend, a while their forward steps they stay.
But if that carelesse heauens (quoth she) despise
To see sad pageants of mens miseries,
Yet can they not warne death from wretched wight.
And take away this long lent loathed light:
That long captiued soules from wearie thraldome free.
But thou, sweet Babe, whom frowning froward fate
Sith heauen thee deignes to hold in liuing state,
Then to thy lucklesse parents did befall:
That cleare she dide from blemish criminall;
Loe I for pledges leaue.  So giue me leaue to rest.
"to"; though better sense is made if the "to" is omitted, as:
"attest that your dead mother died clear from criminal blemish")
With that a deadly shrieke she forth did throw,
And after gaue a grone so deepe and low,
Or thrild with point of thorough piercing paine;
Through +launched+, forth her bleeding life does raine,
Brayes out her latest breath, and vp her eyes doth seele.
Which when that warriour heard, dismounting straict
And soone arriued, where that sad pourtraict
In whose white alabaster brest did sticke
From which forth gusht a streme of gorebloud thick,
And into a deep sanguine dide the grassie ground.
of:_ the thick of it
the more obvious reading, though "labour" more graphically
describes Amavia's suffering and may also refer to her labour in
bearing the child)
Pittifull spectacle of deadly smart,
Which she increased with her bleeding hart,
Als in her lap a +louely+ babe did play
For in her streaming blood he did embay
Pitifull spectacle, as euer eye did view.
may have known that "smart" is perhaps related to the Latin
_mordere_, to bite: see 201.0:3}
Besides them both, vpon the soiled gras
Whose armour all with bloud besprinckled was;
Did paint his chearefull cheekes, yet being +ded,+
Now in his freshest flowre of lustie hed,
But that fiers fate did crop the blossome of his age.
Whom when the good Sir _Guyon_ did behold,
And his fresh bloud did frieze with fearefull cold,
At last his mightie ghost gan deepe to grone,
Mournes inwardly, and makes to himselfe mone;
His +stout courage+ to stoupe, and shew his inward paine.
Out of her gored wound the cruell steele
With his faire garment: then gan softly feele
Of liuing bloud yet in her veynes did hop;
To call backe life to her forsaken shop;
That at the last she gan to breath out liuing aire.
of heart, liver, and other internal organs; hence, here: heart}
Which he perceiuing greatly gan reioice,
Is meetest med'cine, tempred with sweet voice;
Of ruefull pitie, and impatient smart,
Or cursed hand hath plaid this cruell part,
Speake, O deare Lady speake: help neuer comes too late.
Therewith her dim eie-lids she vp gan reare,
As lump of lead, and made darke clouds appeare;
Before her standing she espied had,
She weakely started, yet she nothing drad:
She groueling threw to ground, as hating life and light.
The gentle knight her soone with carefull paine
Thrise he her reard, and thrise she sunke againe,
And to her said; Yet if the stony cold
Let one word fall that may your griefe vnfold,
He oft finds present helpe, who does his griefe impart.
Then casting vp a deadly looke, full +low+
And after, many bitter throbs did throw
These words she breathed forth from riuen chest;
To let a wearie wretch from her dew rest,
Take not away now got, which none would giue to me.
Ah farre be it (said he) Deare dame fro mee,
Or hold sad life in long captiuitee:
The bitter pangs, that doth your heart infest.
Hath with so huge misfortune you opprest?
Or die with you in sorrow, and partake your griefe.
With feeble hands then stretched forth on hye,
And with dry drops congealed in her eye,
Heare then, {o^} man, the sorrowes that vneath
Loe this dead corpse, that lies here vnderneath,
Gay steed with spurs did pricke, the good Sir +Mortdant+ was.
Was, (ay the while, that he is not so now)
So long as heauens iust with equall +brow,+
One day when him high courage did emmoue,
He pricked forth, his puissant force to proue,
This lucklesse child, whom thus ye see with bloud defild.
compared with the past)
Him fortuned (hard fortune ye may ghesse)
_Acrasia_ a false enchaunteresse,
Within a wandring Island, that doth ronne
Faire Sir, if euer there ye trauell, shonne
And know it by the name; it hight the _Bowre of blis_.
"unchastity", "absence of self restraint")
the word-order here also implies the sense of erring, deviating,
etc.)
Her blisse is all in pleasure and delight,
And then with words and weedes of wondrous might,
My +lifest+ Lord she thus beguiled had;
Whom when I heard to beene so ill bestad,
And cast to seeke him forth through danger and great dreed.
palm-leaf or palm-branch as a token; also: an itinerant monk}
Now had faire _Cynthia_ by euen tournes
And thrise three times had fild her crooked hornes,
And bad me call _Lucina_ to me neare.
The woods, the Nymphes, my bowres, my midwiues weare,
Yet nought too deare I deemd, while so my dear I sought.
with Diana)
Greeks peopled all parts of nature: the seas, springs, rivers,
grottoes, trees, mountains.  The nymphs referred to here are
evidently dryads, wood-nymphs)
Him so I sought, and so at last I found,
In chaines of lust and lewd desires ybound,
That me he knew not, neither his owne ill;
I him recured to a better will,
Then meanes I gan deuise for his deliuerance.
Which when the vile Enchaunteresse perceiu'd,
With cup thus charmd, him parting she deceiu'd;
And losse of loue, to her that loues to liue,
So parted we and on our iourney driue,
The charme fulfild, dead suddenly he downe did sincke.
peopled all parts of nature: the seas, springs, rivers, grottoes,
trees, mountains.  The nymph figuratively referred to here is a
naiad, a nymph of fresh water; hence, fresh water itself)
Which when I wretch, Not one word more she sayd
And slyding soft, as downe to sleepe her layd,
That seeing good Sir _Guyon_, could vneath
And from so heauie sight his head did wreath,
Which plunged had faire Ladie in so wretched state.
Then turning to +his+ Palmer said, Old syre
And feeble nature cloth'd with fleshly tyre,
Robs reason of her due regalitie,
The strong it weakens with infirmitie,
The strong through pleasure soonest falles, the weake through
But temperance (said he) with golden squire
Neither to melt in pleasures whot desire,
Thrise happie man, who fares them both atweene:
Of anguish, rather then of crime hath beene,
And in the meane vouchsafe her honorable toombe.
_frieze_ or _frize_ (i.e. "freeze") cf. 201.42:3, 610.33:9;
traditional symbol of temperance; also: rule, precept, model,
pattern}
Palmer (quoth he) death is an +equall+ doome
But after death the tryall is to come,
But both alike, when death hath both supprest,
Which who so wants, wants so much of his rest:
As selfe to dyen bad, vnburied bad to beene.
that the spelling has been forced by the rhyme.  Another
interpretation, suggested by Roche (1978), retains the given
spelling, but assumes that "buriall teene" is a misprint for
"bury all teene" (teen = grief, woe))
to be left unburied; "bide" (pa. ppl. "bidden") = "to remain in
So both agree their bodies to engraue;
And with sad Cypresse seemely it embraue,
They lay therein those corses tenderly,
But ere they did their vtmost obsequy,
Bynempt a sacred vow, which none should aye releace.
becomingly (if referring to the action)
The dead knights sword out of his sheath he drew,
Which medling with their bloud and earth, he threw
Such and such euill God on _Guyon_ reare,
If I or thou dew vengeance doe forbeare,
So shedding many teares, they closd the earth againe.
_Babes bloudie hands may not be clensd,
Her sisters two Extremities:
castle), esp. that comprehended between the flanked angles of two
neighbouring bastions}
THus when Sir _Guyon_ with his faithfull guide
The end of their sad Tragedie vptyde,
Who with sweet pleasance and bold blandishment
As carelesse of his woe, or innocent
In that knights heart, and wordes with bitter teares did steepe.
pleases}
Ah lucklesse babe, borne vnder cruell starre,
Full litle weenest thou, what sorrowes are
Poore Orphane in the wide world scattered,
And throwen forth, till it be withered:
Into this life with woe, and end with miseree.
"funeral pyre", so alluding to the legend of the phoenix
Then soft himselfe inclyning on his knee
(So loue does loath disdainfull nicitee)
He washt them oft and oft, yet nought they beene
Yet still the litle hands were bloudie seene;
And into diuerse doubt his wauering wonder cloue.
He wist not whether blot of foule offence
Or that high God, in +lieu+ of innocence,
To shew how sore bloudguiltinesse he +hat'th+;
Their bloud with secret filth infected hath,
That through the great contagion direfull deadly stunck.
charm)
Whom thus at gaze, the Palmer gan to bord
Ye bene right +hard+ amated, gratious Lord,
Whiles cause not well conceiued ye mistake.
In euery fountaine, and in euery lake,
To proofe of passing wonders hath full often vsd.
Of those some were so from their sourse indewd
Their welheads spring, and are with moisture deawd;
And filles with flowres faire _Floraes_ painted lap:
Or by good prayers, or by other hap,
And thenceforth were renowmd, and sought from place to place.
Such is this well, wrought by occasion straunge,
As she the woods with bow and shafts did raunge,
_Dan Faunus_ chaunst to meet her by the way,
Inflamed was to follow beauties +chace+,
As Hind from her, so she fled from her enimy.
the 1611 edition_
peopled all parts of nature: the seas, springs, rivers, grottoes,
trees, mountains.  The nymph referred to here is one of the
naiads, nymphs of fresh water.  Many of these presided over
springs which were believed to inspire those who drank the water)
adult male deer, esp. Red Deer)}
grandson of Saturn; identified with the Greek Pan)
At last when fayling breath began to faint,
She +set+ her downe to weepe for sore constraint,
Her deare besought, to let her dye a mayd.
Welling out streames of teares, and quite dismayd
Transformd her to a stone from stedfast virgins state.
Lo now she is that stone, from +whose+ two heads,
Yet cold through feare, and old conceiued dreads;
Shapt like a maid, that such ye may her know;
For it is chast and pure, as purest snow,
But euer like her selfe vnstained hath beene tryde.
and "virtues" as at 202.5:6)
From thence it comes, that this babes bloudy hand
Ne certes Sir striue you it to withstand,
That they his mothers innocence may tell,
That as a sacred Symbole it may dwell
And be for all chast Dames an endlesse moniment.
He hearkned to his reason, and the childe
But his sad fathers armes with bloud defilde,
And turning to that place, in which whyleare
And goodly gorgeous barbes, him found not theare.
He is conuaide, but how or where, here fits not tell.
Which when Sir _Guyon_ saw, all were he wroth,
And fairely fare on foot, how euer loth;
So long they traueiled with litle ease,
Built on a rocke adioyning to the +seas,+
And wondrous strong by nature, and by skilfull frame.
Therein three sisters dwelt of sundry sort,
Who dying whylome did diuide this fort
But +strifull+ minde, and diuerse qualitee
Still they did striue, and dayly disagree;
And both against the middest meant to worken woe.
also be "Who, dying, whylome did diuide ...")
cipal in legal proceeding)
Where when the knight arriu'd, he was right well
Of second sister, who did far excell
A sober sad, and comely curteous Dame;
In goodly garments, that her well became,
Him at the threshold met, and well did enterprize.
"Temperate"
She led him vp into a goodly bowre,
Ne in her speach, ne in her hauiour,
But gratious womanhood, and grauitie,
Her golden lockes she roundly did vptye
Did out of order stray about her daintie eares.
braids rather than a snood or net)
Whilest she her selfe thus busily did frame,
Newes hereof to her other sisters came,
Accourting each her friend with lauish fest:
And famous far abroad for warlike gest,
And to his mistresse each himselfe stroue to aduaunce.
He that made loue vnto the eldest Dame,
Yet not so good of deedes, as great of name,
Since errant armes to sew he first began;
And reason with foole-hardize ouer ran;
And was for terrour more, all armd in shyning bras.
kings at 210.25:4.  Glossed by Roche (1978) as "Rashness";
Hamilton (1980) speculates on "Hardi-bras", "Foolhardiness"; this
might also be interpreted as "One Who Chances His Arm".  The name
"Hudibras" was used by Samuel Butler for his satire of that name
published in 1662, but according to the _Grub Street Journal_
(1731), Butler derived the name from that of Hugh de Bras, the
patron saint of Cornwall)
But he that lou'd the youngest, was _Sans-loy_,
The most vnruly, and the boldest boy,
And to all lawlesse lust encouraged,
Ne ought he car'd, whom he endamaged
He now this Ladies champion chose for loue to fight.
These two gay knights, vowd to so diuerse loues,
And dayly warre against his foeman moues,
And th'others pleasing seruice to abate,
How in that place straunge knight arriued late,
And fiercely vnto battell sterne themselues prepar'd.
But ere they could proceede vnto the place,
And cruell combat ioynd in middle space:
They heapt huge strokes, the scorned life to quell,
The house was raysd, and all that in did dwell;
Did rend the ratling skyes with flames of fouldring heat.
The noyse thereof +calth+ forth that straunger knight,
Where when as two braue knights in bloudy fight
His sunbroad shield about his wrest he bond,
Vnto that stead, their strife to vnderstond;
With goodly meanes to pacifie, well as he can.
But they him spying, both with greedy forse
With strokes of mortall steele without remorse,
As when a Beare and Tygre being met
Espye a traueiler with feet surbet,
They stint their strife, and him assaile on euery side.
(SUFQ; cf. 402.15:3)}
But he, not like a wearie traueilere,
And suffred not their blowes to byte him nere,
Whose grieued mindes, which choler did englut,
Gan with new rage their shields to hew and cut;
With heauie load on him they freshly gan to smight.
according to medieval belief, were supposed to determine one's
mental and physical attributes: phlegm, blood, black bile, and
choler.  Choler was associated with rage)
As a tall ship tossed in troublous seas,
Of the rough rockes, do diuersly disease,
That her on either side do sore assay,
She scorning both their spights, does make wide way,
Does ride on both their backs, and faire her selfe doth saue.
"she")
So boldly he him beares, and rusheth forth
Wondrous great prowesse and heroick worth
When two so mighty warriours he dismade:
Now forst to yield, now forcing to inuade,
So double was his paines, so double be his prayse.
Straunge sort of fight, three valiaunt knights to see
A triple warre with triple enmitee,
Which gotten was but hate.  So loue does raine
He maketh warre, he maketh peace againe,
O miserable men, that to him subiect arre.
a dispute}
Whilst thus they mingled were in furious armes,
And naked brest, in pitty of their harmes,
Besought them by the womb, which them had borne,
And by the knighthood, which they sure had sworne,
And to her iust conditions of faire peace to heare.
But her two other sisters standing by,
Pursew the end of their strong enmity,
Yet she with pitthy words and counsell sad,
That at the last suppressing fury mad,
And hearken to the sober speaches, which she spoke.
Ah puissaunt Lords, what cursed euill Spright,
Her hellish brond hath kindled with despight,
Is this the ioy of armes? be these the parts
And not regard dew right and iust desarts?
That more to mighty hands, then rightfull cause doth trust.
gates of hell)
"kindled" = "made to glow")
And were +there+ rightfull cause of difference,
Then with +bloud guiltnesse+ to heape offence,
O fly from wrath, fly, O my liefest Lord:
And thousand furies wait on wrathfull sword;
Then fowle reuenging rage, and base contentious iarre.
cf. 202.4:5_
goddesses who guard the gates of hell; in earlier accounts, they
are avenging deities, of indeterminate number, sent from hell to
punish wrongdoers)
But louely concord, and most sacred peace
Weake she makes strong, and strong thing does increace,
Braue be her warres, and honorable deeds,
And winnes an Oliue girlond for her meeds:
And this misseeming discord meekely lay aside.
Her gracious wordes their rancour did appall,
That downe they let their cruell weapons fall,
To her faire presence, and discrete behests.
And stablish termes betwixt both their requests,
Which to obserue in word of knights they did assure.
Which to confirme, and fast to bind their league,
She them besought, during their quiet treague,
To rest themselues, and grace to reconcile.
Where they are well receiu'd, and made to spoile
Their minds to pleasure, and their mouthes to dainty fare.
be reflexive, "themselves" being understood from the previous
verb)
And those two froward sisters, their faire loues
And fained cheare, as for the time behoues,
But that their natures bad appeard in both:
And inly grieue, as doth an hidden moth
One +thought their+ cheare too litle, th'other thought too mutch.
her_, "which we should perhaps read" (Smith)_
_Elissa_ (so the eldest hight) did deeme
Ne ought would speake, but euermore did seeme
No solace could her Paramour intreat
But with bent lowring browes, as she would threat,
Vnworthy of faire Ladies comely gouernaunce.
But young _Perissa_ was of other mind,
And quite contrary to her sisters kind;
But poured out in pleasure and delight;
And in excesse exceeded her owne might;
But of her loue too lauish (litle haue she thancke.)
+Fast+ by her side did sit the bold _Sans-loy_,
Who in her loosenesse tooke exceeding ioy;
Of her lewd parts to make companion;
Did see and grieue at his bold fashion;
Yet still he sat, and inly did him selfe torment.
Betwixt them both the faire _Medina_ sate
With equall measure she did moderate
That +forward+ paire she euer would asswage,
But that same froward twaine would accourage,
So kept she them in order, and her selfe in heed.
pointing the contrast with "that forward pair")
Thus fairely she attempered her feast,
At last when lust of meat and drinke was ceast,
To tell from whence he came through ieopardie,
Who with bold grace, and comely grauitie,
From lofty siege began these words aloud to sound.
without the modern connotation of surfeit}
This thy demaund, {o^} Lady, doth reuiue
Great and most glorious virgin Queene aliue,
All Faery lond does +peaceably+ sustene.
That ouer all the earth it may be seene;
And in her face faire peace, and mercy doth appeare.
In her the richesse of all heauenly +grace,+
And all that else this worlds enclosure +bace,+
Adornes the person of her Maiestie;
And rare perfection in mortalitie,
As th'Idole of her makers great magnificence.
To her I homage and my seruice owe,
Mongst whom on me she deigned to bestowe
That may this day in all the world be +found,+
The day that first doth lead the yeare around;
Resort, to heare of straunge aduentures to be told.
highest chivalric order of English knighthood, instituted
c. 1344; the sovereign (i.e. Elizabeth I, the Virgin Queen) is
head of the order)
the Julian calendar; cf. also this passage in the general
argument to _SC_: "For it is wel known, and stoutely mainteyned
with strong reasons of the learned, that the yeare beginneth in
March")
There this old Palmer shewed himselfe that day,
Of grieuous mischiefes, which a wicked Fay
Whereof he crau'd redresse.  My Soueraine,
Throughout the world her mercy to maintaine,
Me all vnfit for so great purpose she employes.
Now hath faire _Ph{oe}be_ with her siluer face
Sith last I left that honorable place,
Ne euer shall I rest in house nor hold,
Of whose fowle deedes, too hideous to be +told,+
Whose wofull parents she hath wickedly fordonne.
"inscribed", "recorded", and hence "celebrated".  Cf. 210.4:8)
Tell on, faire Sir, said she, that dolefull tale,
That we may pitty such vnhappy bale,
Ill by ensample good doth often gayne.
And told the storie of the mortall payne,
As with lamenting eyes him selfe did lately vew.
Night was far spent, and now in _Ocean_ deepe
His flaming head did hasten for to steepe,
Whilest with delight of that he wisely spake,
Of kindly sleepe, that did them ouertake.
They wist their houre was spent; then each to rest him hyes.
_Vaine Braggadocchio getting Guyons
Of knighthood trew, and is of fayre
ative.  The name gives rise to "braggadocio", a general term
either for an idle braggart or for his boasting.  Spenser's
spelling varies, so "Braggadocchio", the first encountered, is
here used as the standard)
Greek; foster-daughter of Diana or Phoebe, virgin goddess of
hunting and the moon (see 306.28:5).  For correspondence to
Elizabeth, see I:118-24)
SOone as the morrow faire with purple beames
And _Titan_ playing on the eastern streames,
Sir _Guyon_ mindfull of his vow yplight,
Vnto the iourney which he had behight:
And many-folded shield he bound about his wrest.
shield as borne by Ajax at _Iliad_ 7.220 (imitated by Virgil at
_Aen._ 12.925).  In Homer the layers are of bull's-hide)
Then taking _Cong{e/}_ of that virgin pure,
Did earnestly commit, and her coniure,
And all that gentle noriture ensu'th:
He might for memorie of that dayes ruth,
T'auenge his Parents death on them, that had it wrought.
standard; hence: trust, care; also a variant spelling of: troth,
good faith}
So forth he far'd, as now befell, on foot,
Patience perforce; helpelesse what may it boot
His Palmer now shall foot no more alone:
He lately heard that dying Lady grone,
And rushed in on foot to ayd her, ere she dyde.
there is no other course.  Cf. 310.3:1)
The whiles a losell wandring by the way,
Ne thought of honour euer did assay
A pleasing vaine of glory +vaine+ did find,
Gaue him great ayd, and made him more inclind:
Purloynd both steed and speare, and ran away full light.
fig.)
sport.  The _Boke of St Albans_ defines the hawk appropriate to
each social station: the eagle for an emperor, the peregrine for
an earl, and so down the scale until the kestrel is assigned to a
"knave".  Hence "kestrel" here = "knavish".  The word is also
confused with "coistrel" = "groom", "varlet"; cf.  _Twelfth
Night_ I iii 37}
See also Textual Appendix}
Now gan his hart all swell in iollitie,
That puffed vp with smoke of vanitie,
He gan to hope, of men to be receiu'd
But for in court gay portaunce he perceiu'd,
Eftsoones to court he cast t'+auaunce+ his first degree.
hence: image}
And by the way he chaunced to espy
To whom auaunting in great brauery,
He smote his courser in the trembling flancke,
The seely man seeing him ryde so rancke,
And crying Mercy lowd, his pitious hands gan reare.
Thereat the Scarcrow wexed wondrous prowd,
And with big thundring voyce reuyld him lowd;
Vnworthie of the +commune+ breathed aire,
And doest not vnto death thy selfe prepaire.
Great fauour I thee graunt, for aunswere thus to stay.
Hold, {o^} deare Lord, hold your dead-doing hand,
Ah wretch (quoth he) thy destinies withstand
I giue thee life: therefore prostrated fall,
The Miser threw him selfe, as an Offall,
And cleeped him his liege, to hold of him in fee.
opprobriously of the bodies or limbs of those killed in battle)
So happy peace they made and faire accord:
And when he felt the folly of his Lord,
For he was wylie witted, and growne old
+From+ that day forth he cast for to vphold
And blow the bellowes to his swelling vanity.
_Trompart_ fit man for _Braggadochio_,
Vaine-glorious man, when fluttring wind does blow
The scorne of knighthood and trew cheualrye,
And noble worth to be aduaunced hye:
Doth beare the fairest flowre in honorable seed.
So forth they pas, a well consorted paire,
Who seeing one that shone in armour faire,
Eftsoones supposed him a person meet,
For since the _Redcrosse_ knight he earst did weet,
The ill, which earst to him, he now to _Guyon_ ment.
attached
And comming close to _Trompart_ gan inquere
That rode in golden sell with single spere,
He is a great aduenturer, (said he)
And now hath vowd, till he auenged bee,
That speare is him enough to doen a thousand grone.
Th'enchaunter greatly ioyed in the vaunt,
And both his foen with equall foyle to daunt.
To plaine of wrongs, which had committed bin
Which two through treason and deceiptfull gin,
That mote him honour win, to wreake so foule despight.
identical}
Therewith all suddeinly he seemd enraged,
As if their liues had in his hand beene gaged;
To let him weet his doughtie valiaunce,
If where those knights for feare of dew vengeaunce
That I may wreake on them their hainous hatefull deed.
Certes, my Lord, (said he) that shall I soone,
But mote I wisely you aduise to doon;
Your selfe of sword before that bloudy day:
And oft approu'd in many hard assay,
Do arme your selfe against that day, them to confound.
Dotard (said he) let be thy deepe aduise;
And that weake eld hath left thee nothing wise,
To measure manhood by the sword or maile.
Withouten sword or shield, an host to quaile?
Speake they, which haue beheld the battailes, which it wan.
The man was much abashed at his boast;
With either of those knights on euen coast,
Yet feared least his boldnesse should offend,
When with one sword seuen knights I brought to end,
But it were that, which noblest knight on earth doth weare.
Perdie Sir knight, said then th'enchaunter bliue,
For now the best and noblest knight aliue
He hath a sword, that flames like burning brond.
Shall by to morrow by thy side be fond.
And wondred in his mind, what mote that monster make.
He stayd not for more bidding, but away
The Northerne wind his wings did broad display
From off the earth to take his aerie flight.
Tract of his foot: then dead through great affright
Both fled attonce, ne euer backe returned eie.
Till that they come vnto a forrest greene,
Yet feare them followes still, where so they beene,
As ghastly bug +their haire on end does reare+:
At last they heard a horne, that shrilled cleare
And made the forrest ring, as it would riue in twaine.
does greatly them affeare _FE; perhaps the 1590 reading is a mis-
print of _appeare_, with Spenser subsequently forgetting this, or
changing his mind, when compiling FE and again when revising the
text of 1590 for the 1596 edition (Smith)_
Eft through the thicke they heard one rudely rush;
Downe fell to ground, and crept into a bush,
But _Trompart_ stoutly stayd to taken +heed,+
A goodly Ladie clad in hunters weed,
And by her stately portance, borne of heauenly birth.
Her face so faire as flesh it seemed not,
Cleare as the skie, withouten blame or blot,
And in her cheekes the vermeill red did shew
The which ambrosiall odours from them threw,
Hable to heale the sicke, and to reuiue the ded.
"humours" of the body whose proportions, in medieval physiology,
were supposed to determine one's mental and physical qualities.
Cf. 306.38:5, 310.59:3)
In her faire eyes two liuing lamps did flame,
And darted fyrie beames out of the same,
That quite bereau'd the rash beholders sight:
To kindle oft assayd, but had no might;
She broke his wanton darts, and quenched base desire.
Her iuorie forhead, full of bountie braue,
For Loue his loftie triumphes to engraue,
All good and honour might therein be red:
Sweet words, like dropping honny she did shed,
A siluer sound, that heauenly musicke seemd to make.
Vpon her eyelids many Graces sate,
Working belgards, and amorous retrate,
And euery one with meekenesse to her bowes.
And soueraine moniment of mortall vowes,
For feare through want of skill her beautie to disgrace?
hence, here: charms, refinements.  Cf. _SC_, gloss to "June")
So faire, and thousand thousand times more faire
And was yclad, for heat of scorching aire,
Purfled vpon with many a folded plight,
With golden aygulets, that glistred bright,
+Was hemd with golden fringe+
meaning "body garment", via Spanish or Portuguese _camisa_}
etc.}
Below her ham her weed did somewhat traine,
In gilden buskins of costly Cordwaine,
With curious antickes, and full faire aumayld:
In a rich Iewell, and therein entrayld
How they within their fouldings close enwrapped bee.
used for shoes, etc. by the wealthy in the Middle Ages)
plants}
Like two faire marble pillours they were seene,
Whom all the people decke with girlands greene,
Those same with stately grace, and princely port
But with the wooddie Nymphes when she did +play+,
She could them nimbly moue, and after fly apace.
or dignity upon}
Greeks peopled all parts of nature: the seas, springs, rivers,
grottoes, mountains.  The "wooddie" nymphs referred to here are
evidently the dryads and hamadryads, the nymphs associated with
trees and woodland)
And in her hand a sharpe bore-speare she held,
Stuft with steele-headed darts, wherewith she queld
Knit with a golden bauldricke, which forelay
Her daintie paps; which like young fruit in May
Through her thin weed their places only signifide.
quiver}
Her yellow lockes crisped, like golden wyre,
And when the winde emongst them did inspyre,
And low behinde her backe were scattered:
As through the flouring forrest rash she fled,
And flourishing fresh leaues and blossomes did enwrap.
the rhyme)
Such as _Diana_ by the sandie shore
Where all the Nymphes haue her vnwares forlore,
To seeke her game: Or as that famous Queene
The day that first of _Priame_ she was seene,
To succour the weake state of sad afflicted _Troy_.
Apollo and Diana: these deities are thus also called Cynthius and
Cynthia respectively)
Trojan War; killed by Achilles or his son Pyrrhus)
from the Caucasus and to have settled in Asia Minor, where they
founded the city of Themiscyra.  The Amazons were ruled by a
queen, and the female children had their right breasts burned off
so that they might better use a bow and arrow.  The ninth labour
of Hercules was to take the girdle of Hippolyte, an earlier queen
of the Amazons)
Such when as hartlesse _Trompart_ her did vew,
And doubted, whether he himselfe should shew,
Both feare and hope he in her face did find,
Hayle Groome; didst not thou see a bleeding Hind,
If thou didst, tell me, that I may her ouertake.
also:_ struck
Wherewith reviu'd, this answere forth he threw;
For neither doth thy face terrestriall shew,
Such wounded beast, as that, I did not see,
But mote thy goodlyhed forgiue it mee,
That vnto thee due worship I may rightly frame.
To whom she thus; but ere her words ensewed,
In which vaine _Braggadocchio_ was mewed,
And towards gan a deadly shaft aduaunce,
_Trompart_ forth stept, to stay the mortall chaunce,
Or earthly wight thou be, withhold this deadly howre.
meaning.  We may be intended to infer that in line 4 she lets go
of the spear in order to shoot an arrow.  At 203.42:7 she
apparently recovers the spear)
O stay thy +hand,+ for yonder is no game
But loe my Lord, my liege, whose warlike name,
And now in shade he shrowded yonder lies.
Forth creeping on his caitiue hands and thies,
Did fiercely shake, and rowze, as comming late from rest.
gamebirds flushed from cover); rouse (in the modern sense)
As fearefull fowle, that long in secret caue
Not caring how, her silly life to saue,
Seeing at last her selfe from daunger rid,
She gins her feathers foule disfigured
So shakes off shame, ne thinks how erst she did her hide.
applied to the peacock in splendour)
So when her goodly visage he beheld,
Those deadly tooles, which in her hand she held,
Till she to him her gratious speach renewed;
As all the like, which honour haue pursewed
All vertue merits praise, but such the most of all.
(cf. 203.6:3)
To whom he thus; {o^} fairest vnder skie,
That warlike feats doest highest glorifie.
And many battailes fought, and many fraies
Endeuouring my dreadded name to raise
In her eternall trompe, with laurell girland cround.
Diana, is the goddess of the moon, making this choice of phrase
splendidly crass)
But what art thou, {o^} Ladie, which doest raunge
And doest not it for ioyous court exchaunge,
And all delight does raigne, much more then this?
And swim in pleasure, which thou here doest mis;
The wood is fit for beasts, the court is fit for thee.
Who so in pompe of proud estate (quoth she)
Does waste his dayes in darke obscuritee,
Where ease abounds, yt's eath to doe amis;
Behaues with cares, cannot so easie mis.
Who seekes with painfull toile, shall honor soonest find.
In woods, in waues, in warres she wonts to dwell,
Ne can the man, that moulds in idle cell,
Before her gate high God did Sweat ordaine,
But easie is the way, and passage plaine
And day and night her dores to all stand open wide.
hermit; small room with single occupant, as in a monastery,
prison, etc.}
contrast with the "cell' in line 3)
In Princes court, The rest she would haue said,
Of her sweet words, that all his sence dismaid,
Gan burne in filthy lust, and leaping light,
With that she swaruing backe, her Iauelin bright
So turned her about, and fled away apace.
Which when the Peasant saw, amazd he stood,
Pursew her steps, through wild vnknowen wood;
Whiles in the bush he lay, not yet forgot:
But turning said to _Trompart_, What foule blot
Depart to woods vntoucht, and leaue so proud disdaine?
to his charms)
Perdie (said _Trompart_) let her passe at will,
For who can tell (and sure I feare it ill)
For whiles she spake, her great words did apall
That yet I quake and tremble ouer all.
When first I heard her horne sound with such ghastlinesse.
supernatural}
For from my mothers wombe this grace I haue
That earthly thing may not my courage braue
But either hellish feends, or powres on hie:
Weening it had beene thunder in the skie,
But when I other knew, my selfe I boldly reard.
But now for feare of worse, that may betide,
So to his steed he got, and gan to ride,
He had not trayned bene in cheualree.
For he despysd to tread in dew degree,
And to be easd of that base burden still did +erne+.
_Guyon does Furor bind in chaines,
Deliuers +Phedon+, and therefore
IN braue pursuit of honorable deed,
Betweene the vulgar and the noble seed,
Seemes to be borne by natiue influence;
But chiefly skill to ride, seemes a science
To menage steeds, as did this vaunter; but in vaine.
to; cherish
But he the rightfull owner of that steed,
The whiles on foot was forced for to yeed,
Who suffred not his wandring feet to slide.
Would from the right way seeke to draw him wide,
Teach him the weake to strengthen, and the strong suppresse.
cf. 102.8, etc.)
It fortuned forth faring on his way,
Some troublous vprore or contentious fray,
A mad man, or that feigned mad to bee,
A handsome stripling with great crueltee,
That cheekes with teares, and sides with bloud did all abound.
And him behind, a wicked Hag did stalke,
Her other leg was lame, that she no'te +walke,+
Her lockes, that loathly were and hoarie gray,
But all behind was bald, and worne away,
And eke her face ill fauourd, full of wrinckles old.
And euer as she went, her tongue did walke
Prouoking him by her outrageous talke,
Sometimes she raught him stones, wherwith to smite,
Withouten which she could not go vpright;
That might him moue to wrath, and indignation reare.
The noble _Guyon_ mou'd with great remorse,
And after adding more impetuous forse,
And pluckt him backe; who all on fire streight way,
With beastly brutish rage gan him assay,
And did he wist not what in his auengement.
And sure he was a man of mickle might,
But when the franticke fit inflamd his spright,
Then at the aymed marke, which he had eide:
Whilst reason blent through passion, nought descride,
And where he hits, nought knowes, and whom he hurts, nought cares.
turbid
His rude assault and rugged handeling
In faire defence and goodly menaging
Was he abashed now not fighting so,
Him sternely grypt, and haling to and fro,
But ouerthrew himselfe vnwares, and lower lay.
And being downe the villein sore did beat,
And eke the Hag with many a bitter threat,
With whose reproch and odious menace
Knit all his forces, and gan soone vnbrace
And drew his deadly weapon, to maintaine his part.
Which when the Palmer saw, he loudly cryde,
That Monster can be maistred or destroyd:
As steele can wound, or strength can ouerthroe.
That vnto knighthood workes much shame and woe;
_Occasion_, the root of all wrath +and+ despight.
With her, who so will raging _Furor_ tame,
First her restraine from her reprochfull blame,
Her franticke sonne, and kindles his courage,
It's eath his idle furie to asswage,
The bankes are ouerflowen, when stopped is the flood.
affection of the mind; also: suffering, affliction}
Therewith Sir _Guyon_ left his first emprise,
By the hoare lockes, that hong before her eyes,
Her bitter rayling and foule reuilement,
But nathelesse he did her still torment,
Thereon an yron +lock+ did fasten firme and strong.
Then when as vse of speach was from her reft,
And beckned him, the last helpe she had left:
And both her hands fast bound vnto a stake,
Full fast away, and did her quite forsake;
And soone him ouertooke in sad perplexitie.
In his strong armes he stiffely him embraste,
For all his power was vtterly defaste,
Oft he re'nforst, and oft his forces fayld,
Then him to ground he cast, and rudely hayld,
And both his feet in fetters to an yron racke.
With hundred yron chaines he did him bind,
Yet his great yron teeth he still did grind,
His burning eyen, whom bloudie strakes did staine,
And more for ranck despight, then for great paine,
And bit his tawny beard to shew his raging ire.
bronze chain of 100 links)
Thus when as _Guyon Furor_ had captiu'd,
Whom that mad man of life nigh late depriu'd,
Whom when as he perceiued to respire,
Being at last recured, he gan inquire,
And made that caitiues thral, the thral of wretchednesse.
military service and tenure; also: a gallant, lover}
With hart then throbbing, and with watry eyes,
That hidden lyes vnwares him to +surpryse?+
The man most warie in her whelming lap.
Vnweeting, and vnware of such mishap,
Where this same wicked villein did me +light vpon+.
It was a faithlesse Squire, that was the sourse
With whom from tender dug of commune nourse,
More rype vs reason lent to +chose+ our Peares,
In which we long time without gealous feares,
And for my part I vow, dissembled not a whit.
+It+ was my fortune commune to that age,
The which was borne of noble parentage,
Yet seemd no lesse to loue, then loued to bee:
Ne euer thing could cause vs disagree:
Each stroue to please, and others pleasure to fulfill.
My friend, hight _Philemon_, I did +partake,+
Who greatly ioyous seemed for my sake,
Ne euer wight, that mote so welcome bee,
Ne euer thing, that she could thinke or see,
O wretched man, that would abuse so gentle Dame.
At last such grace I found, and meanes I wrought,
Accord of friends, consent of parents sought,
There wanted nought but few rites to be donne,
Most ioyous man, on whom the shining +Sunne,+
And that my falser friend did no lesse ioyous deeme.
But ere that wished day his beame disclosd,
Or of himselfe to treason ill +disposd+
And told for secret how he vnderstood
Had both distaind her honorable blood,
And therfore wisht me stay, till I more truth should fynd.
The gnawing anguish and sharpe gelosy,
Ranckled so sore, and festred inwardly,
Till that the truth thereof I did outwrest,
Betwixt vs both, to counsell me the best.
Assur'd, ere long the truth to let me vnderstand.
Ere long with like againe he boorded mee,
And that it was a groome of base degree,
Who vsed in a darkesome inner bowre
He promised to bring me at that howre,
And driue me to withdraw my blind abused loue.
This gracelesse man for furtherance of his guile,
Who glad t'embosome his affection vile,
One day to worke her to his will more neare,
What great despight doth fortune to thee beare,
That it should not deface all others lesser light?
for fire (cf. "prytaneum"), in that she is identified as both an
incendiary in the story (see 204.29:8) and herself inflamed with
love (204.27:1))
But if she had her least helpe to thee lent,
Their blazing pride thou wouldest soone haue blent,
Ne should faire _Claribell_ with all her art,
For proofe thereof, this euening, as thou art,
That I may more delight in thy embracement deare.
in view of 204.28:3, and to differentiate her from the
"Claribell" in 612)
The Maiden proud through prayse, and mad through loue
The whiles to me the treachour did remoue
Me leading, in a secret corner layd,
Where left, he went, and his owne false part playd,
Whom he had feignd th'abuser of my loue to bee.
Eftsoones he came vnto th'appointed place,
In _Claribellaes_ clothes.  Her proper face
But weend it was my loue, with whom he playd.
My hart, my hands, mine eyes, and all assayd?
Then wound of gealous worme, and shame of such repriefe.
I home returning, fraught with fowle despight,
Soone as my loathed loue appeard in sight,
That after soone I dearely did lament:
Demaunded, I made plaine and euident,
Confest, how _Philemon_ her wrought to chaunge her weede.
"Pryene" in mind, see 101.16:7)
Which when I heard, with horrible affright
Vpon my selfe that vengeable despight
To wreake my wrath on him, that first it wrought.
I cast to pay, that I so dearely bought;
And washt away his guilt with guiltie potion.
dreadful}
Thus heaping crime on crime, and griefe on griefe,
I meant to purge both with a third mischiefe,
That was _Pryene_; she did first offend,
When I at her my murdrous blade did bend,
And I pursewing my fell purpose, after went.
Feare gaue her wings, and rage enforst my flight;
Till this mad man, whom your victorious might
As I her, so he me pursewd apace,
Sore chauffed at my stay in such a cace,
Which kindled once, his mother did more rage inspyre.
Betwixt them both, they haue me doen to dye,
That death were better, then such agony,
Of which in me yet stickes the mortall sting,
When he thus ended had his sorrowing,
But all your hurts may soone through temperance be easd.
Then gan the Palmer thus, +most+ wretched man,
In their beginning they are weake and wan,
Whiles they are weake betimes with them contend:
Strong warres they make, and cruell battry bend
Wrath, gelosie, griefe, loue this Squire haue layd thus low.
Wrath, gealosie, griefe, loue do thus expell:
Griefe is a flood, and loue a monster fell;
The flood of drops, the Monster filth did breede:
The sparks soone quench, the springing seed +outweed+
So shall wrath, gealosie, griefe, loue dye and decay.
are (1) become weeded out, i.e. the springing seed soon gives
rise to a plant which dies and is therefore thinned out; (2)
germinate, spring out as a weed, with implication of subsequent
death and decay.  In either event one is in little doubt about
the intention)
Vnlucky Squire (said _Guyon_) sith thou hast
Henceforth take heede of that thou now hast past,
Least worse betide thee by some later chaunce.
+_Phedon_+ I hight (quoth he) and do aduaunce
Who first to rayse our house to honour did begin.
_adunateo_, to lack strength or spirit)
Thus as he spake, lo far away they spyde
Whose flying feet so fast their way applyde,
Which mingled all with sweate, did dim his eye.
And all so soyld, that none could him descry;
For _Guyons_ lookes, but scornefull eyglaunce at him shot.
Behind his backe he bore a brasen shield,
A flaming fire in midst of bloudy field,
_Burnt I do burne_.  Right well beseemed it,
And in his hand two darts exceeding flit,
In poyson and in bloud, of malice and despight.
device; another heraldic term}
When he in presence came, to _Guyon_ first
Abandon this forestalled place at erst,
Or bide the chaunce at thine owne ieoperdie.
And though he scornd his idle vanitie,
For not to grow of nought he it coniectured.
Varlet, this place most dew to me I deeme,
But whence should come that harme, which thou doest seeme
Perdy (said he) here comes, and is hard by
That neuer yet encountred enemy,
Ne thou for better hope, if thou his presence stay.
How hight he then (said _Guyon_) and from whence?
For his bold feats and hardy confidence,
The brother of _Cymochles_, both which arre
_Acrates_ sonne of _Phlegeton_ and _Iarre_;
But _Herebus_ sonne of _Aeternitie_ is hight.
hypermetrical_
disturb, cause trouble)
to disturb, cause trouble)
though which fire flows instead of water)
Personified in Hesiod, _Theogony_ 125)
So from immortall race he does proceede,
Drad for his derring do, and bloudy deed;
His am I _Atin_, his in wrong and right,
And stirre him vp to strife and cruell fight.
Least thy foolhardize worke thy sad confusion.
_Troilus and Criseyde_ 5.837)}
His be that care, whom most it doth concerne,
Art thou now bound? for well mote I discerne
My Lord (quoth he) me sent, and streight behight
For he is all disposd to bloudy fight,
Hard is his hap, that first fals in his ieopardie.
Madman (said then the Palmer) that does seeke
She comes vnsought, and shonned followes eke.
Kindles Reuenge, and threats his rusty knife;
And rash _Occasion_ makes vnquiet life.
(Said _Guyon_,) let that message to thy Lord be brought.
voice, "seek" is also used of a woman being courted or wooed}
That when the varlet heard and saw, streight way
That knights and knighthood doest with shame vpbray,
With silly weake old woman +thus to+ fight.
And stoutly prou'd thy puissaunce here in sight;
And with thy bloud abolish so reprochfull blot.
With that one of his thrillant darts he threw,
The quiuering steele his aymed end well knew,
But he was warie, and ere it empight
On which it seizing, no way enter might,
Eftsoones he fled away, and might no where be seene.
dreadful}
_Pyrochles does with Guyon fight,
Of whom sore hurt, for his reuenge
whiles Atin to 1590_
Gymochles finds. 1596_
WHo euer doth to temperaunce apply
Trust me, shall find no greater enimy,
To which right well the wise do giue that name,
Does ouerthrow, and troublous warre proclame:
As did _Pyrochles_, and it wilfully vnbindes.
_perturbationem_: disorder, disquiet, confusion, passion,
emotion, derangement)
sense)
After that varlets flight, it was not long,
One in bright armes embatteiled full strong,
Vpon the trembling waue, so shined bright,
That seemd him to enflame on euery side:
When with the maistring spur he did him roughly stire.
Approching nigh, he neuer stayd to greete,
But prickt so fiers, that vnderneath his feete
Both horse and man nigh able for to choke;
Him first saluted with a sturdy stroke;
To thinke, such hideous puissaunce on foot to beare.
But lightly shunned it, and passing by,
That the sharpe steele arriuing forcibly
On his horse necke before the quilted +sell+
So him dismounted low, he did compell
The truncked beast fast bleeding, did him fowly dight.
_hence:_ decapitated
Sore bruzed with the fall, he slow vprose,
Disleall knight, whose coward courage chose
And shund the marke, at which it should be ment,
So hast thou oft with guile thine honour blent;
If wonted force and fortune +do not much me faile+.
spoiled
With that he drew his flaming sword, and strooke
Of his seuenfolded shield away it tooke,
And open gash therein: were not his targe,
The weary soule from thence it would discharge;
That made him reele, and to his brest his beuer bent.
Exceeding wroth was _Guyon_ at that blow,
Should him dismay, and make him stoup so low,
Tho hurling high his yron braced arme,
That all his left side it did quite disarme;
Deepe in his flesh, and opened wide a red floodgate.
Deadly dismayd, with horrour of that dint
Yet nathemore did it his fury stint,
That welnigh molt his hart in raging yre;
Or strike, or +hurtle+ round in +warlike+ gyre,
But rudely rag'd, and like a cruell Tygre far'd.
He hewd, and lasht, and foynd, and thundred blowes,
Ne plate, ne male could ward so mighty throwes,
But _Guyon_, in the heat of all his strife,
Auauntage, whilest his foe did rage most rife;
And falsed oft his blowes, t'illude him with such bayt.
Like as a Lyon, whose imperiall powre
T'auoide the rash assault and wrathfull stowre
And when him running in full course he spies,
His precious horne, sought of his +enimies+
But to the mighty victour yields a bounteous feast.
directs his path, makes his way
properties, esp. as an antidote to or preventive of poison)
With such faire slight him _Guyon_ often faild,
Him spying, with fresh onset he assaild,
Strooke him so hugely, that through great constraint
And do vnwilling worship to the Saint,
Such homage till that instant neuer learned hee.
Whom _Guyon_ seeing stoup, pursewed fast
And soone his dreadfull blade about he cast,
That streight on ground made him full low to lye;
With that he cryde, Mercy, do me not dye,
That hath (maugre her spight) thus low me laid in dust.
loudly
Eftsoones his cruell hand Sir _Guyon_ stayd,
And maistring might on enimy dismayd:
Then to him said, Liue and allegaunce owe,
And henceforth by this dayes ensample trow,
Do breede repentaunce late, and lasting infamie.
So vp he let him rise, who with grim looke
His grated teeth for great disdeigne, and shooke
Knotted in bloud and dust, for griefe of mind,
Yet in himselfe some comfort he did find,
Whose bounty more then might, yet both he wondered.
Which _Guyon_ marking said, Be nought agrieu'd,
Was neuer man, who most conquestes atchieu'd
Yet shortly gaynd, that losse exceeded farre:
But to be lesser, then himselfe, doth marre
Vaine others ouerthrowes, +who+ selfe doth ouerthrowe.
Fly, O _Pyrochles_, fly the dreadfull warre,
Outrageous anger, and woe-working iarre,
Those, those thy foes, those warriours far remoue,
But sith in might thou didst my mercy proue,
That thee against me drew with so impetuous dread.
consuming fire, pyre (see 204.38:5, note at 204.41:2)
Dreadlesse (said he) that shall I soone declare:
Vnto an aged woman, poore and bare,
Voide of all succour and needfull comfort:
To worke such shame.  Therefore I thee exhort,
And to her captiue sonne yield his first libertee.
in the preceding line); _also, perhaps:_ Fearless One (as a term
of address)
Thereat Sir _Guyon_ smilde, And is that all
Great mercy sure, for to enlarge a thrall,
Nath'lesse now quench thy whot emboyling wrath:
Thereat he wondrous glad, out of the path
And gan to breake the bands of their captiuitee.
Soone as _Occasion_ felt her selfe vntyde,
She to her vse returnd, and streight defyde
Bycause he wonne; the other because hee
To stirre vp strife, and +do+ them disagree:
To kindle his quencht fire, and thousand causes wrought.
_SC_, gloss to "April", and "September", 106.  This somewhat
provincial word occurs nowhere else in _FQ_ and is a striking
example of Spenser's alterations for the 1596 edition)_
It was not long, ere she inflam'd him so,
And his redeemer chalengd for his foe,
But yielded had to that same straunger knight:
And him affronted with impatient might:
Whiles _Guyon_ standing by, their vncouth strife does see.
insufferable (from Furor's viewpoint)
Him all that while _Occasion_ did prouoke
Vpon the old, him stirring to be wroke
For suffering such abuse, as knighthood shamed,
Ne would with vaine +occasions+ be inflamed;
Yet nothing could him to impatience entise.
Their fell contention still increased more,
That he his foe has hurt, and wounded sore,
His mother eke, more to augment his +spight+,
Which she in _Stygian_ lake, ay burning +bright+
That armd with fire, more hardly he mote him withstond.
rivers of hell)
Tho gan +that+ villein wex so fiers and strong,
He cast him downe to ground, and all along
And fowly battered his comely corse,
At last he was compeld to cry perforse,
To rid a wretched man from hands of hellish wight.
The knight was greatly moued at his plaint,
Till that the Palmer, by his graue restraint,
And said, Deare sonne, thy causelesse ruth represse,
He that his sorrow sought through wilfulnesse,
Deserues to tast his follies fruit, repented payne.
_Guyon_ obayd; So him away he drew
Already fought, his voyage to pursew.
When late he saw his Lord in heauy plight,
Him deeming dead, as then he seemd in sight,
Vnto his brother, whom _Cymochles_ men did call.
He was a man of rare redoubted might,
And glorious spoiles, purchast in perilous fight:
Had doen to death, subdewde in equall frayes,
Of fowles and beastes he made the piteous prayes,
On gallow trees, in honour of his dearest Dame.
His dearest Dame is that Enchaunteresse,
And idle pleasures in +her+ _Bowre_ of _Blisse_,
Can call out of the bodies of fraile wightes:
And horribly misshapes with vgly sightes,
And darksom dens, where _Titan_ his face neuer shewes.
There _Atin_ found _Cymochles_ soiourning,
Was giuen all to lust and loose liuing,
And now he has pourd out his idle mind
Hauing his warlike weapons cast behind,
Mingled emongst loose Ladies and lasciuious boyes.
And ouer him, art striuing to compaire
Framed of wanton Yuie, flouring faire,
His +pricking+ armes, entrayld with roses red,
And all within with flowres was garnished,
Did breath out bounteous smels, and painted colors shew.
in _FQ_ it is often an emblem of licentiousness: cf. e.g.
west wind)
And fast beside, there trickled softly downe
+Emongst+ the pumy stones, and made a sowne,
The wearie Traueiler, wandring that way,
And then by it his wearie limbes display,
His former paine, and wypt away his toylsom sweat.
swowne, swoune, swoon; _furthermore "the obsolete spelling avoids
the harsh dental of `sound'", observes Hamilton (1980)_
And on the other side a pleasaunt groue
That dedicated is t'_Olympicke Ioue_,
+Gaynd in _Nemea_+ goodly victoree;
Chaunted alowd their chearefull harmonie:
That quickned the dull spright with musicall comfort.
whose abode is Olympus; or it is the poplar, dedicated to
Hercules.  The latter is more probable in view of "shot vp high"
in line 2, which more accurately describes the habit of the
poplar)
lion and founded the Nemean games)
There he him found all carelesly displayd,
On a sweet bed of lillies softly layd,
That round about him dissolute did play
Euery of which did loosely disaray
And shewd them naked, deckt with many ornaments.
And euery of them stroue, with most delights,
Some framd faire lookes, glancing like euening +lights,+
Some bathed kisses, and did soft embrew
One boastes her beautie, and does yeeld to vew
Another her out boastes, and all for tryall strips.
He, like an Adder, lurking in the weeds,
And his fraile eye with spoyle of beautie feedes;
Whiles through their lids his wanton eies do peepe,
Whereby close fire into his heart does creepe:
Made drunke with drugs of deare voluptuous receipt.
divestment ("beautie" referring to the scantily clad "Damzels" of
the preceding stanzas)
view of the damsels}
_Atin_ arriuing there, when him he spide,
Fiercely approching, to him lowdly cride,
In which that manly person late did fade,
Or where hath he hong vp his mortall blade,
Is all his force forlorne, and all his glory donne?
sensual meaning:_ still, motionless
cf. 107.4:7); vanish (cf. 105.15:5)
Then pricking him with his sharpe-pointed dart,
That here in Ladies lap entombed art,
And weetlesse eke of lately wrought despight,
And groneth out his vtmost grudging spright,
Calling thy helpe in vaine, that here in ioyes art dround.
Suddeinly out of his delightfull dreame
But he would not endure that wofull theame
With percing words, and pittifull implore,
With hellish feends, or _Furies_ mad vprore,
And called for his armes; for he would algates fight.
intensive_
darts: see 204.38:7-9)
They bene ybrought; he quickly does him dight,
Ne Ladies loues, ne sweete entreaties might
For he has vowd, to beene aueng'd that day,
On him, that did _Pyrochles_ deare dismay:
And _Atin_ aie him pricks with spurs of shame and wrong.
_Guyon is of immodest +Merth,+
Fights with Cymochles, whiles his bro-
means "intemperate", "unbridled")
meaning of "mirth" is "fun", "ridicule")
A Harder lesson, to learne Continence
For sweetnesse doth allure the weaker sence
From that, which feeble nature couets faine;
And foes of life, she better can +restraine+;
And _Guyon_ in them all shewes goodly maisteries.
Whom bold _Cymochles_ trauelling to find,
The wrath, which _Atin_ kindled in his mind,
Wayting to passe, he saw whereas did swim
A litle Gondelay, bedecked trim
That like a litle forrest seemed outwardly.
creepers}
And therein sate a Ladie fresh and faire,
Sometimes she sung, as loud as larke in aire,
Yet was there not with her else any one,
Matter of merth enough, though there were none
To feede her foolish humour, and vaine iolliment.
Which when farre off _Cymochles_ heard, and saw,
The little barke vnto the shore to draw,
The merry marriner vnto his word
Turnd to the shore, where that same warlike Lord
She would admit, albe the knight her much did pray.
Eftsoones her shallow ship away did slide,
Withouten oare or Pilot it to guide,
Only she turn'd a pin, and by and by
Ne cared she her course for to apply:
And both from rocks and flats it selfe could wisely saue.
cf. 206.11:5 etc.)
And all the way, the wanton Damzell found
For she in pleasant purpose did abound,
Of which a store-house did with her remaine,
For all her words she drownd with laughter vaine,
That turned all her pleasance to a scoffing game.
And other whiles vaine toyes she would deuize,
Sometimes her head she fondly would aguize
About her necke, or rings of rushes plight;
To laugh at shaking +of+ the leaues light,
About her litle frigot, therein making way.
Her light behauiour, and loose dalliaunce
That of his way he had no souenaunce,
But to weake wench did yeeld his martiall might.
With one sweet drop of sensuall +delight,+
Of malice in the calme of pleasant womankind.
Diuerse discourses in their way they spent,
Both what she was, and what that vsage ment,
Vaine man (said she) that wouldest be reckoned
Of _Ph{ae}dria_ (for so my name is red)
For thou to serue _Acrasia_ thy selfe doest vaunt.
_phaidros_)
In this wide Inland sea, that hight by name
That knowes her port, and thither sailes by ayme,
Or whether swift I wend, or whether slow:
Ne swelling _Neptune_, ne loud thundring _Ioue_
My litle boat can safely passe this perilous bourne.
thunderbolt; hence: storms)
this life: cf. _Hamlet_ III i 79); burn, brook, small river (in
which case "pass" should be understood as "pass over"; cf. _King
Lear_ III vi 25)
Whiles thus she talked, and whiles thus she toyd,
And come vnto an Island, waste and voyd,
There her small Gondelay her port did make,
Disburdned her.  Their way they forward take
Whose pleasaunce she him shew'd, and plentifull great store.
It was a chosen plot of fertile land,
As if it had by Natures cunning hand,
And laid forth for ensample of the best:
No arboret with painted blossomes drest,
To bud out faire, and +her sweet smels throw+ all around.
No tree, whose braunches did not brauely spring;
No bird, but did her shrill notes sweetly sing;
Trees, braunches, birds, and songs were framed fit,
Carelesse the man soone woxe, and his weake wit
So pleased, did his wrathfull purpose faire appease.
Thus when she had his eyes and senses fed
Into a shadie dale she soft him led,
And her sweet selfe without dread, or disdaine,
In her loose lap, it softly to sustaine,
The whiles with a +loud+ lay she thus him sweetly charm'd.
of armour")
should be noted that "loud" also has the meaning "flagrant"
(usually applied to a lie), and might just be construed here as
"scandalous", "suggestive", etc.  See also 206.3:3, 212.15:1-4)
Behold, {o^} man, that toilesome paines doest +take+
How they themselues doe thine ensample make,
Out of her fruitfull lap; how, no man knowes,
And deck the world with their rich pompous showes;
Yet no man to them can his carefull paines compare.
display)
The lilly, Ladie of the flowring field,
Bid thee to them thy fruitlesse labours yield,
Loe loe how braue she decks her bounteous boure,
Therein to shrowd her sumptuous Belamoure,
But to her mother Nature all her care she lets.
of the Bourbons -1594, and as such ambiguously an iris or the head
of a sceptre or battle-axe; hence a phallic symbol; see also
_Winter's Tale_ IV iv 126-7)
word is also used for an unidentified flower in _Amoretti_ 64:7)
Why then dost thou, {o^} man, that of them all
Wilfully make thy selfe a wretched thrall,
Seeking for daunger and aduentures vaine?
Who shall him rew, that swimming in the maine,
Refuse such fruitlesse toile, and present pleasures chuse.
salt}
By this she had him lulled fast a sleepe,
Then she with liquors strong his eyes did steepe,
So she him left, and did her selfe betake
The slouthfull +waue+ of that great +griesly+ lake;
And now is come to that same place, where first she weft.
meaning is "squalid", "hideous".  Cf. 109.35:4 (where 1611 has
"griesly"), 211.12:3, 301.67:7, 312.19:2)
By this time was the worthy _Guyon_ brought
Where she was rowing, and for passage sought:
Her ferry brought, where him she byding fond,
But the _Blacke Palmer_ suffred still to stond,
To ferry that old man ouer the perlous foord.
and Cymochles has travelled from it)
_Guyon_ was loath to leaue his guide behind,
For the flit barke, obaying to her mind,
Ne gaue him leaue to bid that aged sire
Through the dull billowes thicke as troubled mire,
Nor timely tides did driue out of their sluggish sourse.
And by the way, as was her wonted guize,
And did of ioy and iollitie deuize,
The knight was courteous, and did not forbeare
But when he saw her toy, and gibe, and geare,
Her dalliance he despisd, and follies did forsake.
Yet she still followed her former stile,
Till they arriued in that pleasant Ile,
But when as _Guyon_ of that land had sight,
Ah Dame, perdie ye haue not doen me right,
Me litle needed from my right way to haue straid.
Faire Sir (quoth she) be not displeasd at all;
Ne wind and weather at his pleasure call:
The wind vnstable, and doth neuer stay.
Till season serue new passage to assay;
Therewith she laught, and did her earnest end in iest.
But he halfe discontent, mote nathelesse
The ioyes whereof, and happie fruitfulnesse,
And all though pleasant, yet she made much more:
The trees did bud, and earely blossomes bore,
And told that gardins pleasures in their caroling.
than the modern meaning is to be taken, since at 206.11:3 we are
told that the island is "waste"}
And she more sweet, then any bird on bough,
And striue to passe (as she could well enough)
So did she all, that might his constant hart
And drowne in dissolute delights apart,
Might not reuiue desire of knightly exercize.
weapons
But he was wise, and warie of her will,
Yet would not seeme so rude, and thewed ill,
That gentle Ladie did to him impart,
And euer her desired to depart.
And euer bad him stay, till time the tide renewd.
from the true path"); wanton entertainment
wants him never to leave)
And now by this, _Cymochles_ howre was spent,
And shaking off his drowzie dreriment,
In slouthfull sleepe his molten hart to steme,
Tho vp he started, stird with shame extreme,
But marched to the strond, +there+ passage to require.
And in the way he with Sir _Guyon_ met,
Eftsoones he gan to rage, and inly fret,
Thou recreant knight, and soone thy selfe prepaire
Loe, loe alreadie, how the fowles in aire
Thy carcasse for their pray, the guerdon of thy paine.
And therewithall he fiercely at him flew,
Who soone prepard to field, his sword forth drew,
Their mightie strokes their haberieons dismayld,
The mortall steele despiteously entayld
That a large purple streme +adown+ their giambeux falles.
_Cymochles_, that had neuer met +before,+
His proud presumed force increased more,
Sir _Guyon_ grudging not so much his might,
With wrathfull fire his courage kindled bright,
And doubling all his powres, redoubled euery stroke.
Both of them high attonce their hands enhaunst,
_Cymochles_ sword on _Guyons_ shield yglaunst,
But _Guyons_ angry blade so fierce did play
That quite it cloue his plumed crest in tway,
Wherewith astonisht, still he stood, as senselesse stone.
Still as he stood, faire _Ph{ae}dria_, that beheld
And at their feet her selfe most humbly feld,
Ah well away, most noble Lords, how can
To shed your liues on ground? wo worth the man,
In his owne flesh, and make way to the liuing spright.
If euer loue of Ladie did empierce
Withhold your bloudie hands from battell fierce,
Both yeeld, to stay your deadly strife a space.
Most wretched woman, and of wicked race,
And cause of death betweene two doughtie knights doe breed.
But if for me ye fight, or me will serue,
Are meet, the which doe men in bale to sterue,
Such cruell game my scarmoges disarmes:
Doe loue, where loue does giue his sweet alarmes,
Does yeeld vnto his foe a pleasant victory.
Debatefull strife, and cruell enmitie
But louely peace, and gentle amitie,
The mightie martiall hands doe most commend;
Then of their armes: _Mars_ is _Cupidoes_ frend,
Then all his wars and spoiles, the which he did of yore.
Therewith she sweetly smyld.  They though full +bent,+
Yet at her speach their rages gan relent,
Such powre haue pleasing words: such is the might
Now after all was ceast, the Faery knight
And yield him readie passage to that other part.
determined to fight to the death)
She no lesse glad, then he desirous was
And vaine delight she saw he light did pas,
Still solemne sad, or still disdainfull coy,
That her sweet peace and pleasures did annoy,
That she well pleased was thence to amoue him farre.
"pas")
Tho him she brought abord, and her swift bote
The which on the dull waues did lightly flote
Where gladsome _Guyon_ +salied+ forth to land,
Vpon that shore he spied _Atin_ stand,
In _Ph{ae}drias_ +flit+ barke ouer that perlous shard.
filth
Well could he him remember, sith of late
Streight gan he him reuile, and bitter rate,
Hath tracted forth some saluage +beastes+ trade;
The shame and death, which will thee soone inuade?
That art thus foully fled from famous enemie?
With that he stiffely shooke his steelehead dart:
Though somewhat moued in his mightie hart,
And passed fairely forth.  He turning taile,
Awaiting passage, which him late did faile;
The hastie heat of his auowd reuenge delayd.
which he was lately disappointed
+Whylest+ there the varlet stood, he saw from farre
He ran on foot, as if in lucklesse warre
He seemed breathlesse, hartlesse, faint, and wan,
And soyld with durtie gore, that no man can
But bent his hastie course towards the idle flood.
The varlet saw, when to the flood he came,
And deepe him selfe +beducked+ in the same,
Ne of his safetie seemed care he kept,
The waues about, and all his armour swept,
Yet still he bet the water, and the billowes dasht.
_Atin_ drew nigh, to weet what it mote bee;
Whom should he, but his owne deare Lord, there see,
Readie to drowne himselfe for fell despight.
What dismall day hath lent +this+ cursed light,
_Pyrochles_, {o^} _Pyrochles_, what is thee betyde?
I burne, I burne, I burne, then loud he cryde,
Yet nought can quench mine inly flaming syde,
Nothing but death can doe me to respire.
After pursewing death once to require,
Death is for wretches borne vnder vnhappie starre.
Perdie, then +is it+ fit for me (said he)
+Burning+ in flames, yet no flames can I see,
O _Atin_, helpe to me last death to giue.
That his deepe wounded hart in two did riue,
Did follow that ensample, which he blam'd afore.
Into the lake he lept, his Lord to ayd,
And of him catching hold him strongly stayd
Of that seas nature did him not auise.
Engrost with mud, which did them foule agrise,
Ne ought mote euer sinke downe to the bottome there.
Whiles thus they strugled in that idle waue,
The other both from drowning for to saue,
Whose hoarie locks great grauitie did crowne,
By fortune came, led with the troublous sowne:
The carefull seruant, striuing with his raging Lord.
Him _Atin_ spying, knew right well of yore,
To saue my Lord, in wretched plight forlore;
Weake hands, but counsell is most strong in age.
To see _Pyrochles_ there so rudely rage:
Then pittie, he in hast approched to the shore.
And cald, _Pyrochles_, what is this, I see?
Furious euer I thee knew to bee,
These flames, these flames (he cryde) do me torment.
In daunger rather to be drent, then brent?
Ne can be quencht, within my secret bowels bee.
deities sent from hell to punish wrongdoers)
That cursed man, that cruell feend of hell,
His deadly wounds within my +liuer+ swell,
Kindled through his infernall brond of spight,
That now I weene _Ioues_ dreaded thunder light
In flaming _Phlegeton_ does not so felly roste.
through which fire flows instead of water (see 204.41:7))
Which when as _Archimago_ heard, his griefe
Then searcht his secret wounds, and made a priefe
Or with the hidden +fire too inly+ warmd.
And +euermore+ with mighty spels them charmd,
And him restor'd to health, that would haue algates dyde.
the water)
_Guyon findes +Mamon+ in a delue,
Is by him tempted, and led downe,
influence; the God of Money; see _Matt._ 6.24, _Luke_ 16.9-13;
_PL_ 1.678 ff., 2.228 ff.)
AS Pilot well expert in perilous waue,
When foggy mistes, or cloudy tempests haue
And couer'd heauen with hideous dreriment,
The maisters of his long experiment,
Bidding his winged vessell fairely forward +fly.+
So _Guyon_ hauing lost his trusty guide,
Yet on his way, of none accompanide;
Of his owne vertues, and prayse-worthy deedes.
Which fame of her shrill trompet worthy reedes:
That nought but desert wildernesse shew'd all around.
At last he came vnto a gloomy glade,
Whereas he sitting found in secret shade
Of griesly hew, and fowle ill fauour'd sight;
His head and beard with sout were ill bedight,
In smithes fire-+spitting+ forge, and nayles like clawes appeard.
sight")
His yron coate all ouergrowne with rust,
Whose glistring glosse darkned with filthy dust,
A worke of rich entayle, and curious mould,
And in his lap a masse of coyne he told,
+And+ couetous desire with his huge threasury.
plants}
And round about him lay on euery side
Of which some were rude owre, not purifide
Some others were new driuen, and distent
Some in round plates withouten moniment;
The antique shapes of kings and kesars straunge and rare.
Soone as he _Guyon_ saw, in great affright
Those pretious hils from straungers enuious sight,
Into the hollow earth, them there to hide.
His hand, that trembled, as one terrifyde;
Yet him perforce restraynd, and to him doubtfull sayd.
inquiry makes clear)
What art thou man, (if man at all thou art)
And these rich +heapes+ of wealth doest hide apart
Thereat with staring eyes fixed askaunce,
That darest vew my direfull countenaunce,
To trouble my still seate, and heapes of pretious pelfe.
practice or fact of lending or borrowing money at interest)
God of the world and worldlings I me call,
That of my plenty poure out vnto all,
Riches, renowme, and principality,
For which men swinck and sweat incessantly,
And in the hollow earth haue their eternall brood.
or ruler}
Wherefore if me thou deigne to serue and sew,
Or if to thy great mind, or greedy vew
Ten times so much be numbred francke and free.
And idle offers of thy golden fee;
Proffer thy giftes, and fitter seruaunts entertaine.
take as a model, pattern, or ideal)
Me ill +besits+, that in der-doing armes,
Vnto thy bounteous baytes, and pleasing charmes,
Regard of worldly mucke doth fowly blend,
That ioyes for crownes and kingdomes to contend;
Those be the riches fit for an aduent'rous knight.
from "derring-do", and is believed to be a deliberate archaism}
blind
Vaine glorious Elfe (said he) doest not thou weet,
Sheilds, steeds, and armes, and all things for thee meet
And crownes and kingdomes to thee multiply.
Sometimes to him, that low in dust doth ly?
And whom I lust, do heape with glory and renowne?
All otherwise (said he) I riches read,
First got with guile, and then preseru'd with dread,
Leauing behind them griefe and heauinesse.
+Strife,+ and debate, bloudshed, and bitternesse,
That noble heart +as+ great dishonour doth despize.
Ne thine be kingdomes, ne the scepters thine;
And loyall truth to treason doest incline;
The crowned often slaine, the slayer cround,
And purple robe gored with many a wound;
So mak'st thou kings, and gaynest wrongfull gouernement.
purple was a dye obtained in the eastern Mediterranean from the
whelks _Murex trunculus_ and _M. brandaris_ and processed at the
Phoenician city of Tyre, whence it was sold at high price to the
Romans.  "Purple" also = "blood-red" (cf. e.g. 206.29:9), thus
adding more meaning to the phrase)
Long were to tell the troublous stormes, that tosse
Who swelling sayles in Caspian sea doth crosse,
Doth not, I weene, so many euils meet.
Are mortall men so fond and vndiscreet,
And hauing not complaine, and hauing it vpbraid?
notoriously stormy)
being rich)
Indeede (quoth he) through fowle intemperaunce,
But would they thinke, with how small allowaunce
Such superfluities they would despise,
At the well head the purest streames arise:
And with vncomely weedes the gentle waue accloyes.
The antique world, in his first flowring youth,
But with glad thankes, and vnreproued truth,
Like Angels life was then mens happy cace;
Abusd her plenty, and fat swolne encreace
The measure of her meane, and naturall first need.
variant spelling of "troth", good faith}
Then gan a cursed hand the quiet wombe
And the hid treasures in her sacred tombe,
Fountaines of gold and siluer to abound,
And pompous pride eftsoones he did compound;
His greedy flames, and kindled life-deuouring fire.
gold and silver)}
Sonne (said he then) let be thy bitter scorne,
To them, that liu'd therein in state forlorne;
Thy workes for wealth, and life for gold engage.
Take what thou please of all this surplusage;
But thing refused, do not afterward accuse.
Me list not (said the Elfin knight) receaue
Ne wote I, but thou didst these goods bereaue
Or that +bloud guiltinesse+ or guile them blot.
Ne toung did tell, ne hand these handled not,
From heauens sight, and powre of all which them pursew.
_1596: cf. 202.4:5, 202.30:3_
What secret place (quoth he) can safely hold
Or where hast thou thy wonne, that so much gold
Come thou (quoth he) and see.  So by and by
A darkesome way, which no man could descry,
And was with dread and horrour compassed around.
At length they came into a larger space,
Through which a beaten broad high way did trace,
By that wayes side, there sate +infernall+ Payne,
The one in hand an yron whip did straine,
And both did gnash their teeth, and both did threaten life.
On thother side in one consort there sate,
Disloyall Treason, and hart-burning Hate,
Sitting alone, his bitter lips did bight,
And found no place, where safe he shroud him might,
And Shame his vgly face did hide from liuing eye.
And ouer them sad +Horrour+ with grim hew,
And after him Owles and Night-rauens flew,
Of death and dolour telling sad tidings;
A song of bale and bitter sorrow sings,
Which hauing ended, after him she flyeth swift.
or the night-heron.  See _SC_, gloss to "June"}
a woman; associated with greed.  The others were Ocypeta and
A{e"}llo.  See _Aen._ 3.219 ff.)
All these before the gates of _Pluto_ lay,
But th'Elfin knight with wonder all the way
At last him to a litle dore he brought,
Was next adioyning, ne them parted +ought+:
That did the house of Richesse from hell-mouth diuide.
Before the dore sat selfe-consuming Care,
For feare least Force or Fraud should vnaware
Ne would he suffer Sleepe once thither-ward
For next to death is Sleepe to be compard:
Here Sleep, there Richesse, and Hel-gate them both betwext.
So soone as _Mammon_ there arriu'd, the dore
Him followed eke Sir _Guyon_ euermore,
Soone as he entred was, the dore streight way
An vgly feend, more fowle then dismall day,
And euer as he went, dew watch vpon him kept.
medieval calendar}
Well hoped he, ere long that hardy guest,
Or lips he layd on thing, that likt him best,
Should be his pray.  And therefore still on hye
Threatning with greedy gripe to do him dye
If euer he transgrest the fatall _Stygian_ lawes.
of which was supposed to accompany sleep; cf. _Cymbeline_ I iii
use quoted by _OED_ is by Ben Jonson in 1601.  Cf. also 108.22:7}
That houses forme within was rude and strong,
From whose rough vaut the ragged breaches hong,
And with rich metall loaded euery rift,
And ouer them _Arachne_ high did lift
Enwrapped in fowle smoke and clouds more blacke then Iet.
Ovid's story is retold and embellished in _Muiopotmos_ 257 ff.)
Both roofe, and floore, and wals were all of gold,
And hid in darkenesse, that none could behold
Did neuer in that house it selfe display,
Such as a lamp, whose life does fade away:
Does shew to him, that walkes in feare and sad affright.
In all that rowme was nothing to be seene,
All bard with double bends, that none could weene
On euery side they placed were along.
And dead mens bones, which round about were flong,
And their vile carcases now left vnburied.
They forward passe, ne _Guyon_ yet spoke word,
Which to them opened of +his+ owne accord,
As eye of man did neuer see before;
Though all the wealth, which is, or was of yore,
And that aboue were added to that vnder ground.
The charge thereof vnto a couetous Spright
And warily awaited day and night,
Who it to rob and ransacke did intend.
Loe here the worldes blis, loe here the end,
Such grace now to be happy, is before thee laid.
Certes (said he) I n'ill thine offred grace,
Another blis before mine eyes I place,
To them, that list, these base regardes I lend:
Do rather choose my flitting houres to spend,
Then them to haue my selfe, and be their seruile +sclaue+.
Thereat the feend his gnashing teeth did grate,
For well he weened, that so glorious bayte
Had he so doen, he had him snatcht away,
Eternall God thee saue from such decay.
Him to entrap vnwares another way he wist.
Thence forward he him led, and shortly brought
To him did open, as it had beene taught:
And hundred fornaces all burning bright;
Deformed creatures, horrible in sight,
To melt the golden metall, ready to be tride.
One with great bellowes gathered filling aire,
Another did the dying bronds repaire
With liquid waues, fiers _Vulcans_ rage to tame,
Some scumd the drosse, that from the metall came;
And euery one did swincke, and euery one did sweat.
But when +as+ earthly wight they present saw,
From their whot worke they did themselues withdraw
They neuer creature saw, that came that way.
And vgly shapes did nigh the man dismay,
Till that him thus bespake their soueraigne Lord and sire.
Behold, thou Faeries sonne, with mortall eye,
The thing, that thou didst craue so earnestly,
Proceeded, lo now is reueald to thee.
Now therefore, if thou wilt enriched bee,
Least thou perhaps hereafter wish, and be withstood.
Suffise it then, thou Money God (quoth hee)
All that I need I haue; what needeth mee
With such vaine shewes thy worldlings vile abuse:
_Mammon_ was much displeasd, yet no'te he chuse,
And thence him forward led, him further to entise.
development in the characterization of Guyon which becomes
increasingly evident as Book II proceeds, reaching its apogee
with the destruction of the Bower of Bliss at 212.81-3)
He brought him through a darksome narrow strait,
The gate was open, but therein did wait
As +if+ +that+ highest God defie he would;
+But+ he himselfe was all of +golden+ mould,
That cursed weapon, when his cruell foes he queld.
_Disdayne_ he called was, and did disdaine
Sterne was +his+ looke, and full of stomacke vaine,
Far passing th'hight of men terrestriall;
That made him scorne all creatures great and small,
More fit amongst blacke fiendes, then men to haue his place.
Rhea, Hyperion, Cronos; see Hesiod, _Theogony_ 132-8)
Soone as those glitterand armes he did espye,
His harmefull club he gan to hurtle hye,
Who likewise gan himselfe to batteill dight,
And counseld him abstaine from perilous fight:
Ne mortall steele emperce his miscreated mould.
So hauing him with reason pacifide,
He brought him in.  The rowme was large and wide,
Many great golden pillours did vpbeare
And euery pillour decked was full deare
Which mortall Princes wore, whiles they on earth did rayne.
which a religious guild or fraternity lived}
A route of people there assembled were,
Which with great vprore preaced to draw nere
A stately siege of soueraigne maiestye;
And richly clad in robes of royaltye,
His glory did enhaunce, and pompous pride display.
_hence:_ throne
Her face right wondrous faire did seeme to bee,
Through the dim shade, that all men might it see:
But wrought by art and counterfetted shew,
Nath'lesse most heauenly faire in deed and vew
Thenceforth she sought for helps, to cloke her crime withall.
There, as in glistring glory she did sit,
Whose vpper end to highest heauen was knit,
And all that preace did round about her swell,
To clime aloft, and others to excell:
And euery lincke thereof a step of dignity.
Some thought to raise themselues to high degree,
Some by close shouldring, some by flatteree;
And all by wrong wayes for themselues prepard.
Those that were low themselues, held others hard,
But euery one did striue his fellow downe to throw.
Which whenas _Guyon_ saw, he gan inquire,
And what she was that did so high aspire.
Whom all that folke with such contention,
Honour and dignitie from her alone
For which ye men do striue: few get, but many mis.
monarch; mass}
And faire _Philotime_ she rightly hight,
But that this darksome neather world her light
Worthy of heauen and hye felicitie,
But sith thou hast found fauour in mine eye,
That she may thee aduance for workes and merites iust.
(esp. sexually)
specifically from God}
Gramercy _Mammon_ (said the gentle knight)
But I, that am fraile flesh and earthly wight,
My selfe well wote, and mine vnequall fate;
And loue auowd to other Lady late,
To chaunge loue causelesse is reproch to warlike knight.
_Mammon_ emmoued was with inward wrath;
Through griesly shadowes by a beaten path,
With hearbs and fruits, whose kinds mote not be red:
Throwes forth to men, sweet and well sauoured,
Fit to adorne the dead, and decke the drery toombe.
There mournfull _Cypresse_ grew in greatest store,
Dead sleeping _Poppy_, and blacke _Hellebore_,
Mortall _Samnitis_, and _Cicuta_ bad,
Wise _Socrates_, who thereof quaffing glad
To the faire _Critias_ his dearest Belamy.
mythology, trees associated with death and grief.  Cf. 201.60:3,
secretion of the liver: by transference applied to any poison or
venom; the gall-nut or oak-apple is an excrescence caused on oak
trees by insects of the family _Cynipidae_.  Hence "trees of
bitter _Gall_" might be intended to mean "oaks")
_Diospyros ebenus_, producing hard black wood}
called the stinking hellebore) rather than the green hellebore
_H. viridis_.  Both are highly poisonous plants found growing in
England, and were formerly used officinally as violent cathartics
and emetics, though they are so dangerous that their use was
abandoned)
colocynthis_, a plant of the gourd family.  The fruit has a very
bitter pulp, producing a purgative drug.  The colocynth is the
gourd referred to in _2 Kings_ 4.38-41; see also _Othello_ I iii
the dried tops of which are abortifacient: hence "Mortall".  Cf.
drink hemlock)
Tyrants.  Perhaps an error for "Crito" on Spenser's part)
The +_Gardin_+ of _Proserpina_ this hight;
With a thicke Arber goodly ouer dight,
Her selfe to shroud, and pleasures to entreat.
With braunches broad dispred and body great,
And loaden all with fruit as thicke as it might bee.
Their fruit were golden apples glistring bright,
On earth like neuer grew, ne liuing wight
For those, which _Hercules_ with conquest bold
And planted there, did bring forth fruit of gold:
Swift _Atalanta_, when through craft he her out ran.
cf. also _Aen._ 6.136-43)
get possession of the apples in the garden of the three
Hesperides, the daughters of Hesperus.  In _Comus_ 402-6, the
Hesperides are made the nieces of Atlas)
pillars of the universe; Hercules took over this burden while
Atlas went to fetch the golden apples on his behalf)
he is called Hippomenes)
hand in marriage.  Those who lost the race were condemned to
death; Hippomenes only succeeded because Venus gave him three
golden apples which he threw on the ground, making Atalanta
delay to stop and pick them up.  See _Met._ 10.560-704,
_Amoretti_ 77)
Here also sprong that goodly golden fruit,
Whom he had long time sought with fruitlesse suit:
The which emongst the gods false _Ate_ threw;
Till partiall _Paris_ dempt it _Venus_ dew,
That many noble _Greekes_ and _Troians_ made to bleed.
_Heroides_ 20-1)
of protest)
apple inscribed "To the fairest" among the guests at the wedding
of Thetis and Peleus.  A contest, held on Mount Ida, ensued
between Minerva, Juno and Venus; Paris awarded the apple to
Venus, who gave him Helen, and this led to the Trojan War.  See
Hyginus, _Fabulae_ 42)
The warlike +Elfe+ much wondred at this tree,
And his broad braunches, laden with rich fee,
Of this great gardin, compast with a mound,
In a blacke flood which flow'd about it round;
In which full many soules do endlesse waile and weepe.
the others are Acheron, Phlegethon, Lethe, and Styx)
Which to behold, he clomb vp to the banke,
In those sad waues, which direfull deadly stanke,
That with their pitteous cryes, and yelling shrights,
Emongst the rest of those same ruefull sights,
That drenched lay full deepe, vnder the Garden side.
Deepe was he drenched to the vpmost chin,
Of the cold liquor, which he waded in,
To reach the fruit, which grew vpon the brincke:
Did flie abacke, and made him vainely swinke:
He daily dyde, yet neuer throughly dyen couth.
The knight him seeing labour so in vaine,
Who groning deepe, thus answerd him againe;
Lo _Tantalus_, I here tormented lye:
Lo here I now for want of food doe dye:
Of grace I pray thee, giue to eat and drinke to mee.
Nay, nay, thou greedie _Tantalus_ (quoth he)
And vnto all that liue in high degree,
To teach them how to vse their present state.
Accusing highest _Ioue_ and gods ingrate,
As authour of vniustice, there to let him dye.
He lookt a little further, and espyde
Within the riuer, which the same did hyde:
Aboue the water were on high extent,
Yet nothing cleaner were for such intent,
So lost his labour vaine and idle industry.
The knight him calling, asked who he was,
I _Pilate_ am the falsest Iudge, alas,
And wicked doome, to Iewes despiteous
And did acquite a murdrer felonous;
The whiles my soule was soyld with foule iniquitie.
Infinite moe, tormented in like paine
Ne _Mammon_ would there let him long remaine,
In which the damned soules he did behold,
Why takest not of that same fruit of gold,
To rest thy wearie person, in the shadow coole.
All which he did, to doe him deadly fall
To which if he inclined had at all,
Would him haue rent in thousand peeces strayt:
And well perceiued his deceiptfull sleight,
So goodly did beguile the Guyler of +the+ pray.
And now he has so long remained there,
For want of food, and sleepe, which two vpbeare,
That none without the same enduren can.
Since he this hardie enterprize began:
Into the world to guide him backe, as he him brought.
The God, though loth, yet was constraind t'obay,
Below the earth, might suffred be to stay:
But all so soone as his enfeebled spright
As ouercome with too exceeding might,
And all his senses were with deadly fit opprest.
_Sir Guyon laid in swowne is by
Whom Arthur soone hath reskewed
ANd is there care in heauen? and is there loue
That may compassion of their euils moue?
Of men, then beasts.  But {o^} th'exceeding grace
And all his workes with mercy doth embrace,
To serue to wicked man, to serue his wicked foe.
How oft do they, their siluer bowers leaue,
How oft do they with golden pineons, cleaue
Against foule feends to aide vs millitant?
And their bright Squadrons round about vs plant,
O why should heauenly God to men haue such regard?
During the while, that _Guyon_ did abide
That wanton Mayd of passage had denide,
And being on his way, approched neare,
He heard a voice, that called loud and cleare,
That all the fields resounded with the ruefull cry.
hither, hither _1609, to preserve the metre_
The Palmer lent his eare vnto the noyce,
Againe he heard a more efforced voyce,
His feeble feet directed to the cry;
Where _Mammon_ earst did sunne his threasury:
In senselesse dreame; which sight at first him sore aghast.
Beside his head there sate a faire young man,
Whose tender bud to blossome new began,
His snowy front curled with golden heares,
Diuinely shone, and two sharpe winged sheares,
Were fixed at his backe, to cut his ayerie wayes.
instance cited by _OED_}
Like as _Cupido_ on _Id{ae}an_ hill,
And mortall arrowes, wherewith he doth fill
With his faire mother he him dights to play,
The Goddesse pleased with his wanton play,
The whiles the other Ladies mind their merry glee.
the handmaids of Venus rather than her daughters; see _DGDG_
Whom when the Palmer saw, abasht he was
Till him the childe bespoke, Long lackt, alas,
Whiles deadly fit thy pupill doth dismay;
But dread of death and dolour doe away;
And he that breathlesse seemes, shal corage bold respire.
Harold")
original form of "sir"}
The charge, which God doth vnto me arret,
Yet will I not forgoe, ne yet forget
But euermore him succour, and defend
For euill is at hand him to offend.
His painted nimble wings, and vanisht quite away.
The Palmer seeing his left empty place,
Woxe sore affraid, and standing still a space,
At last him turning to his charge behight,
Where finding life not yet dislodged quight,
As chicken newly hatcht, from dreaded destiny.
At last he spide, where towards him did pace
And them beside an aged Sire did trace,
That breathed strife and troublous enmitie;
Who meeting earst with _Archimago_ slie,
That he, which earst them combatted, was _Guyon_ bold.
pursuing)
Which to auenge on him they dearely vowd,
False _Archimage_ prouokt their courage prowd,
Coles of contention and whot vengeance tynd.
Keeping that slombred corse to him assynd;
With him in bloudie armes they rashly did debate.
ground")
Whom when _Pyrochles_ saw, inflam'd with rage,
That with thy brutenesse shendst thy comely age,
Of that same outcast carkasse, that erewhile
And crownd his coward crest with knightly stile;
To proue he liued ill, that did thus foully dye.
To whom the Palmer fearelesse answered;
Thus for to blot the honour of the dead,
Whose liuing hands immortalizd his name.
And enuie base, to barke at sleeping fame:
Your selfe his prowesse prou'd and found him fiers and bold.
Then said _Cymochles_; Palmer, thou doest dote,
Saue as thou seest or hearst.  But well I wote,
Yet gold all is not, that doth golden seeme,
The worth of all men by their end esteeme,
Bad therefore I him deeme, that thus lies dead on field.
Good or bad (gan his brother fierce reply)
Or what doth his bad death now satisfy
Sith wrathfull hand wrought not her owne desire?
I will him reaue of armes, the victors hire,
For why should a dead dog be deckt in armour bright?
Faire Sir, said then the Palmer suppliaunt,
Ne blame your honour with so shamefull vaunt
Is sacrilege, and doth all sinnes exceed;
To decke his herce, and trap his +tomb-blacke+ steed.
But be entombed in the rauen or the kight?
common in England)
With that, rude hand vpon his shield he laid,
Both fiercely bent to haue him disaraid;
An armed knight, of bold and bounteous grace,
And couerd shield.  Well kend him so farre space
When vnder him he saw his Lybian steed to praunce.
_Diospyros ebenus_, producing hard black wood}
And to those brethren said, Rise rise by liue,
For yonder comes the prowest knight aliue,
That hath to Paynim knights wrought great distresse,
That word so deepe did in their harts impresse,
And gan themselues prepare to battell greedily.
But fierce _Pyrochles_, lacking his owne sword,
And _Archimage_ besought, him that afford,
So would I (said th'enchaunter) glad and faine
Or ought that else your honour might maintaine,
To be contrarie to the worke, which ye intend.
For that same knights owne sword this is of yore,
For that his noursling, when he knighthood swore,
The metall first he mixt with _Med{ae}wart_,
Then it in flames of _Aetna_ wrought apart,
Of hellish _Styx_, which hidden vertue to it gaue.
astrology by Jupiter and used for various officinal purposes.  It
is also the plant "that Queen Elizabeth of famous memory did more
desire than any sweet herb to strew her chambers"; quoted
Genders, 1971)
sixteenth century; its flames were associated with Vulcan, who
forged Aeneas's arms)
Vulcan tempered from white heat the sword made for Daunus, the
father of Turnus (_Aen._ 12.90-1))
The vertue is, that neither steele, nor stone
Ne euer may be vsed by his fone,
Ne euer will it breake, ne euer bend.
In vaine therefore, _Pyrochles_, should I lend
For sure it would deceiue thy labour, and thy might.
Foolish old man, said then the Pagan wroth,
Soone shalt thou see, and then beleeue for troth,
His Lords owne flesh.  Therewith out of his hond
And _Guyons_ shield about his +wrest+ he bond;
And match his brother proud in battailous array.
By this that straunger knight in presence came,
Him answered, as courtesie became,
Gaue signes of grudge and discontentment vaine:
Where at his feete, with sorrowfull demaine
In whose dead face he red great magnanimity.
Said he then to the Palmer, Reuerend syre,
Or did his life her fatall date expyre,
How euer, sure I rew his pitteous plight.
Hath him befalne, but cloudes of deadly night
And all his senses drowned in deepe senselesse waue.
original form of "sir"}
+Which, those his cruell foes, that stand hereby+,
Would him disarme, and treaten shamefully,
But you, faire Sir, whose honorable sight
Mote I beseech to succour his sad plight,
First praise of knighthood is, foule outrage to deface.
same foes, that stand hereby _1590, 1596: FE;_ Which those same
foes, that doen awaite hereby _1609_
revenge)
Palmer, (said he) no knight so rude, I weene,
Ne was there euer noble courage seene,
Honour is least, where oddes appeareth most.
The rash reuengers heat.  Words well dispost
If not, leaue vnto me thy knights last +patronage+.
physiology: and see the etymology of "Pyrochles" at 204.41:2)
Tho turning to those brethren, thus bespoke,
It seemes, iust wrongs to vengeance +doe+ prouoke,
Mote ought allay the storme of your despight,
Not to debate the chalenge of your right,
Whom fortune hath alreadie laid in lowest seat.
contention_
To whom _Cymochles_ said; For what art thou,
The vengeance prest?  Or who shall let me now,
And make his carkasse as the outcast dong?
The guilt, which if he liued had thus long,
The trespasse still doth liue, albe the person die.
Indeed (then said the Prince) the euill donne
But from the grandsyre to the Nephewes sonne,
Till vengeance vtterly the guilt bereaue:
That doth against the dead his hand +vpreare+,
And great disparagment makes to his former might.
_Pyrochles_ gan reply the second time,
How that thou art partaker of his crime:
With that his hand, more sad then lomp of lead,
His owne good sword _Morddure_, to cleaue his head.
But swaruing from the marke, his Lords life did assure.
to be his partner, by the Crusaders: the name may derive from the
Persian _tir-magian_, meaning a magian lord or deity; or from
"Tervagan", a proper name in _Chanson de Roland_.  See _OF_
Yet was the force so furious and so fell,
Nath'lesse the Prince would not forsake his sell:
But full of anger fiercely to him cride;
The law of armes, to strike foe vndefide.
Right sowre, and feele the law, the which thou hast defast.
With that his balefull +speare,+ he fiercely bent
His cursed life out of her lodge haue rent:
That seuen-fold shield, which he from _Guyon_ brought
Through all those foldes the steelehead passage wrought
He groueling fell, all gored in his gushing wound.
Which when his brother saw, fraught with great griefe
And fowly said, By _Mahoune_, cursed thiefe,
Then hurling vp his harmefull blade on hye,
That from his saddle forced him to fly:
Haue cleft his head in twaine, and life thence dispossest.
Now was the Prince in daungerous distresse,
His single speare could doe him small redresse,
The least of which was match for any knight.
Had reard himselfe againe to cruell fight,
Vnmindfull of his wound, of his fate ignoraunt.
So both attonce him charge on either side,
That forced him his ground to trauerse wide,
For +in+ his shield, as thicke as stormie showre,
Ne backward shrinke, but as a stedfast towre,
Them on her bulwarke beares, and bids them nought auaile.
intended to be read in quotation marks, i.e. as a retort: "Naught
avail!", "Do your worst!")
So stoutly he withstood their strong assay,
His poinant speare he thrust with puissant sway
That through his thigh the mortall steele did gryde:
Did breake the launce, and let the head abyde:
That vnderneath his feet soone made a purple plesh.
Horribly then he gan to rage, and rayle,
Als when his brother saw the red bloud +rayle+
For very felnesse lowd he gan to weepe,
That twise hath sped; yet shall it not thee keepe
Loe where the dreadfull Death behind thy backe doth stond.
allowing a duplicate rhyme when the meaning of the second word
differs from that of the first_
With that he strooke, and th'other strooke withall,
The one vpon his couered shield did fall,
But th'other did vpon his troncheon smyte,
It made, and on his hacqueton did lyte,
It seizd in his right side, and there the dint did stay.
jacket covered with chain-mail}
Wyde was the wound, and a large lukewarme flood,
That when the Paynim spyde the streaming blood,
On th'other side, in huge perplexity,
Nought could he hurt, but still at ward did ly:
_Cymochles_ twise, that twise him forst his foot reuoke.
Whom when the Palmer saw in such distresse,
And said; +faire+ Son, great God thy right hand blesse,
Glad was the knight, and with fresh courage fraught,
Then like a Lion, which hath long time saught
Emongst the shepheard swaynes, then wexeth wood and yond.
it", "ought" being the past tense of "owe" in the sense "owned",
"possessed".  1596 means "as wisely as it ought to be used": the
change might have been "a correction of the printer, who
misunderstood `ought'" (Smith)_
"beyond fury")
So fierce he laid about him, and dealt blowes
Ne shield defend the thunder of his throwes:
Eft to _Cymochles_ twise so many fold:
Them both attonce compeld with courage bold,
And though they both stood stiffe, yet could not both withstond.
As saluage Bull, whom two fierce mastiues bayt,
Forgets with warie ward them to awayt,
Or flings aloft, or treads downe in the flore,
That all the forrest quakes to heare him rore:
That neither could his mightie puissance sustaine.
animal, for "sport")
But euer at _Pyrochles_ when he smit,
Whereon the Faery Queenes pourtract was writ,
And his deare hart the picture gan adore,
But him henceforth the same can saue no more;
That no'te auoyded be by earthly skill or powre.
For when _Cymochles_ saw the fowle reproch,
And inward griefe, he fiercely gan approch,
Or dye with honour and desert of fame;
That quite disparted all the linked frame,
Yet made him twise to reele, that neuer moou'd afore.
shoulders}
Whereat renfierst with wrath and sharpe regret,
That it empierst the Pagans burganet,
Into his head, and cruell passage made
Breathd out his ghost, which to th'infernall shade
For all the sinnes, wherewith his lewd life did +abound.+
?with additional connotations of "renforced", "reinforced",
"strengthened")
Which when his german saw, the stony +feare,+
Ne thenceforth life ne courage did appeare,
Long trembling still he stood: at last thus sayd;
Thy cursed hand so cruelly haue swayd
After so wicked deed why liu'st thou lenger day?
With that all desperate as loathing light,
Assembling all his force and vtmost might,
And strooke, and foynd, and lasht outrageously,
The Prince, with patience and sufferaunce sly
Tho when +this+ breathlesse woxe, that batteil gan renew.
As when a windy tempest bloweth hye,
The cloudes, as things affrayd, before him flye;
Is layd, they fiercely then begin to shoure,
Now all attonce their malice forth do poure;
And suffred rash _Pyrochles_ wast his idle might.
At last when as the Sarazin perceiu'd,
But when he stroke most strong, the dint deceiu'd,
Vpon him lightly leaping without heed,
Thinking to ouerthrow and downe him tred:
And through his nimble sleight did vnder him down cast.
Nought booted it the Paynim then to striue;
That may not hope by flight to scape aliue,
So he now subiect to the victours law,
For vile disdaine and rancour, which did gnaw
As one that loathed life, and yet despisd to dye.
But full of Princely bounty and great mind,
But casting wrongs and all reuenge behind,
And said, Paynim, this is thy dismall day;
And my trew liegeman yield thy selfe for ay,
And all thy wrongs will wipe out of my souenaunce.
medieval calendar}
Foole (said the Pagan) I thy gift defye,
And say, that I not ouercome do dye,
Wroth was the Prince, and sory yet withall,
Yet sith his fate so cruelly did fall,
And left his headlesse body bleeding all the place.
By this Sir _Guyon_ from his traunce awakt,
And looking vp, when as his shield he lakt,
But when the Palmer, whom he long ygoe
And said, Deare sir, whom wandring to and fro
Firme is thy faith, whom daunger neuer fro me drew.
But read what wicked hand hath robbed mee
With so fresh hew vprising him to see,
For want of weapons, they shall soone be had.
Which that straunge knight for him sustained had,
Whose carcases on ground were horribly prostrate.
Which when he heard, and saw the tokens trew,
And to the +Prince bowing+ with reuerence dew,
My Lord, my liege, by whose most gratious ayd
What may suffise, to be for meede repayd
+But to be euer bound+
To whom the Infant thus, Faire Sir, what need
To bind their doers, to receiue their meede?
Oppressours powre by armes and puissant hond?
So goodly purpose they together fond,
The whiles false _Archimage_ and _Atin_ fled apace.
_The house of Temperance, in which
Besiegd of many foes, whom straunger
(1) "Nourishing", "Fair", "Gracious", "Propitious", "Kind"
(Latin); (2) "Maiden" (Hebrew); (3) "All Good" (Celtic))
OF all Gods workes, which do this world adorne,
Then is mans body both for powre and forme,
But none then it, more fowle and indecent,
It growes a Monster, and incontinent
Behold, who list, both one and other in this place.
After the Paynim brethren conquer'd were,
And _Guyon_ his lost shield, they both yfere
Till him the Prince with gentle court did bord;
To weet why on your shield so goodly scord
Full liuely is the semblaunt, though the substance dead.
Faire Sir (said he) if in that picture dead
What mote ye weene, if the trew liuely-head
But if the beautie of her mind ye knew,
Thousand times fairer then her mortall hew,
And infinite desire into your spirite poure!
She is the mighty Queene of _Faerie_,
She is the flowre of grace and chastitie,
My liefe, my liege, my Soueraigne, my deare,
And with her light the earth enlumines cleare;
As well in state of peace, as puissaunce in warre.
and _SC_, gloss to "December": "_Venus_, the goddesse of beauty
or pleasure.  Also a signe in heaven, as it is here taken")
Thrise happy man, (said then the _Briton_ knight)
Haue made +thee+ souldier of that Princesse bright,
Doth blesse her seruaunts, and them high aduaunce.
By faithfull seruice, and meet amenance,
For losse of thousand liues, to dye at her desire.
Said _Guyon_, Noble Lord, what meed so great,
But by your wondrous worth and warlike feat
But were your will, her sold to entertaine,
Great guerdon, well I wote, should you remaine,
As _Arthegall_, and _Sophy_ now beene honored.
chivalric order of English knighthood, instituted c. 1344; the
sovereign (i.e. Elizabeth, the Virgin Queen) is head of the
order)
book of _FQ_)
Certes (then said the Prince) I God auow,
My whole desire has beene, and yet is now,
+Now hath+ the Sunne with his lamp-burning light,
+Sith+ of that Goddesse I haue sought the sight,
Heauen doth to me enuy, and fortune +fauourlesse+.
spacing is very tight in the quartos.  If so,_ fortune _should
be read as_ Fortune_.  Weight is given to this possibility by the
beginning of the next line_
interweave
follow my quest (see also Textual Appendix)
Fortune, the foe of famous cheuisaunce
But in her way throwes mischiefe and mischaunce,
But +you,+ faire Sir, be not herewith dismaid,
Which were it not, that I am else delaid
I labour would to guide you through all Faery land.
steer, direct your course (usu. applied to ships: _OED_ first
records this usage in 1627)
Gramercy Sir (said he) but mote I +weete+,
Perhaps my succour, or aduizement meete
Then gan Sir _Guyon_ all the story shew
Which to auenge, the Palmer him forth drew
They wasted had much way, and measurd many miles.
Palmer ...")
And now faire _Ph{oe}bus_ gan decline in hast
Whenas they spide a goodly castle, plast
Which choosing for that euenings hospitale,
And from their sweaty Coursers did auale,
And euery loup fast lockt, as fearing foes despight.
squire has lent Guyon his, or a spare, horse)
Which when they saw, they weened fowle reproch
Till that the Squire gan nigher to approch;
That with the noise it shooke, as it would fall:
The watch, and lowd vnto the knights did call,
Who gently answered, They entrance did desire.
Fly, fly, good knights, (said he) fly fast away
Fly fast, and saue your selues from neare decay,
We would and would againe, if that we could;
And with long siege vs in this castle hould:
And many good knights slaine, that haue vs sought to saue.
Thus as he +spoke+, loe with outragious cry
Out of the rockes and caues adioyning nye,
All threatning death, all in straunge manner armd,
Some rusty kniues, some staues in fire warmd.
Staring with hollow eyes, and stiffe vpstanding heares.
Fiersly at first those knights they did assaile,
They gaue fresh charge, their forces gan to faile,
For with such puissaunce and impetuous maine
Like scattered +Sheepe+, whenas the Shepheards swaine
With greedy pace forth rushing from the forest nye.
A while they fled, but soone returnd againe
And euermore their cruell +Captaine+
And ouerrun to tread them to the ground.
Broke their rude troupes, and orders did confound,
For though they bodies seeme, yet substance from them fades.
As when a swarme of Gnats at euentide
Their murmuring small trompets sounden wide,
That as a cloud doth seeme to dim the skies;
For their sharpe wounds, and noyous iniuries,
Doth blow them quite away, and in the _Ocean_ cast.
Ireland; the Lough of Allen is cited as one source of Ireland's
principal river, the Shannon)
Thus when they had that troublous rout disperst,
And entraunce crau'd, which was denied erst.
And combrous +conflict+, which they did sustaine,
She forth issewed with a goodly traine
And entertained them right fairely, as befell.
_Alma_ she called was, a virgin bright;
Yet was she +woo'd+ of many a gentle knight,
That sought with her to lincke in marriage:
And in the flowre now of her freshest age;
That euen heauen reioyced her sweete face to see.
In robe of lilly white she was arayd,
The traine whereof loose far behind her strayd,
And borne of two faire Damsels, which were taught
Was trimly wouen, and in tresses wrought,
But crowned with a garland of sweete Rosiere.
Goodly she entertaind those noble knights,
Where gentle court and gracious delight
Shewing her selfe both wise and liberall:
They her besought of fauour speciall,
She graunted, and them leading forth, the same did shew.
First she +them+ led vp to the Castle wall,
And all so faire, and +fensible+ withall,
But of thing like to that _AEgyptian_ slime,
But {o^} great pitty, that no lenger time
Soone it must turne to earth; no earthly thing is sure.
of Nineveh)
The frame thereof seemd partly circulare,
Those two the first and last proportions are,
Th'other immortall, perfect, masculine,
Proportioned equally by seuen and nine;
All which compacted made a goodly +diapase+.
Therein two gates were placed seemly well:
Did th'other far in workmanship excell;
But of more worthy substance fram'd it was;
That when it locked, none might thorough pas,
Still open to their friends, and closed to their foes.
allowing the rhyme)
Of hewen stone the porch was fairely wrought,
Then Iet or Marble far from Ireland brought;
Enchaced with a wanton yuie twine.
Which to the gate directly did incline,
Neither vnseemely short, nor yet exceeding long.
Within the Barbican a Porter sate,
Nor wight, nor word mote passe out of the gate,
Vtterers of secrets he from thence debard,
His larumbell might lowd and wide be hard,
Early and late it rong, at euening and at prime.
gate or bridge; hence: the mouth}
And round about the porch on euery side
In glistring steele, and strongly fortifide:
And were enraunged ready, still for fight.
They did obeysaunce, as beseemed right,
The Porter eke to her did lout with humble gestes.
Thence she them brought into a stately Hall,
And ready dight with drapets festiuall,
At th'upper end there sate, yclad in red
That in his hand a white rod menaged,
And in demeanure sober, and in counsell sage.
uvula}
And through the Hall there walked to and fro
Whose name was _Appetite_; he did bestow
And knew them how to order without blame,
Did dewty to their Lady, as became;
Into the kitchin rowme, ne spard for nicenesse none.
It was a vaut ybuilt for great dispence,
And one great chimney, whose long tonnell thence,
There placed was a caudron wide and tall,
More whot, then _Aetn'_, or flaming _Mongiball_:
So long as any thing it in the caudron got.
sixteenth century)
_Mongibello_)
But to delay the heat, least by mischaunce
There added was by goodly ordinaunce,
Continually, and cooling breath inspyre.
With hookes and ladles, as need did require;
They did about their businesse sweat, and sorely toyld.
The maister Cooke was cald _Concoction_,
The kitchin Clerke, that hight _Digestion_,
And set them forth, as well he could deuise.
Some to remoue the scum, as it did rise;
And others it to vse according to his kind.
But all the liquour, which was fowle and wast,
They in another great round vessell plast,
And all the rest, that noyous was, and nought,
Was close conuaid, and to the back-gate brought,
It was auoided quite, and throwne out priuily.
outermost gate, named after the largest of the hills on which
Rome was built; it gave access to a common dump)
Which goodly order, and great workmans skill
And gazing wonder they their minds did fill;
Thence backe againe faire _Alma_ led them right,
That was with royall arras richly dight,
Not wrought, nor pourtrahed, but easie to be thought.
And in the midst thereof vpon the floure,
Courted of many a iolly Paramoure,
And eachone sought his Lady to aggrate:
His wanton sports, being returned late
His cruell bow, wherewith he thousands hath dismayd.
Diuerse delights they found them selues to please;
Some plaid with strawes, some +idly+ sat at ease;
All pleasaunce was to them griefe and annoy:
Another seemed enuious, or coy,
But at these straungers presence euery one did hush.
affecting an abject demeanour}
carpets, rushes were strewn on the floor.  Favoured guests were
given clean rushes, but other visitors had to make do with used
rushes, or none at all.  Hence the phrase "not worth a rush")
Soone as the gracious _Alma_ came in place,
And to her homage made, with humble grace:
Themselues to court, and each a Damsell chose:
That was right faire and fresh as morning rose,
As if some pensiue thought constraind her gentle spright.
In a long purple pall, whose skirt with +gold,+
And in her hand a Poplar braunch did hold:
Gentle Madame, why beene ye thus dismaid,
Liues any, that you hath thus ill apaid?
What euer be the cause, it sure beseemes you ill.
glory; she is named "Praise-desire")
Faire Sir, (said she halfe in disdainefull wise,)
And in your selfe do not the same aduise?
That may vnwares be blotted with the same:
Through great desire of glory and of fame;
That haue +twelue moneths+ sought one, yet no where can her find.
Collier; cf. 202.7:7_
hence, here: mien, mood (see Textual Appendix))
The Prince was inly moued at her speach,
Yet with faire +semblaunt+ sought to hide the breach,
Now seeming flaming whot, now stony cold.
What wight she was, that Poplar braunch did hold:
That by well doing sought to honour to aspire.
The whiles, the _Faerie_ knight did entertaine
That was right faire, and modest of demaine,
Straunge was her tyre, and all her garment blew,
Vpon her fist the bird, which shonneth vew,
Did sit, as yet ashamd, how rude _Pan_ did her dight.
cuckoo)
below, sometimes depicted with goat's ears and horns)
So long as _Guyon_ with her +commoned+,
And euer and anone with rosie red
That her became, as polisht yuory,
With faire vermilion or pure +Castory+.
So straungely passioned, and to her gently sayd,
line mercuric sulphide, used as a dye}
and used for medicine and perfumery}
Faire Damzell, seemeth, by your troubled +cheare+,
You to molest, or other ill to feare
From whence it doth, as cloud from sea arise.
But if ought else that I mote not deuise,
To ease you of that ill, so wisely as I may.
She answerd nought, but more abasht for shame,
The flashing bloud with blushing did inflame,
That _Guyon_ meruayld at her vncouth cace:
Faire Sir at that, which ye so much embrace?
You +shamefast+ are, but _Shamefastnesse_ it selfe is shee.
Thereat the Elfe did blush in priuitee,
Dissembled faire, and faynd to ouersee.
Themselues did solace each one with his Dame,
To vew her castles other wondrous frame.
Ascending by ten steps of Alablaster wrought.
That Turrets frame most admirable was,
And lifted high aboue this earthly masse,
But not on ground mote like to this be found,
In _Thebes_, which _Alexander_ did confound;
From which young _Hectors_ bloud by cruell _Greekes_ was spilt.
being later occupied by Luxor and Karnak)
Thebes was his first major conquest)
turn the son of Priam, the last king of Troy); Astyanax was
thrown from the tower by the Greeks when they captured Troy.
See _Met._ 13.415-7)
The roofe hereof was arched ouer head,
Two goodly Beacons, set in watches stead,
For they of liuing fire most subtilly
Couer'd with lids deuiz'd of substance sly,
O who can tell the prayses of that makers might!
Ne can I tell, ne can I stay to tell
That all this other worlds worke doth excell,
That God hath built for his owne blessed bowre.
But three the chiefest, and of greatest powre,
The wisest men, I weene, that liued in their ages.
Not he, whom _Greece_, the Nourse of all good arts,
Might be compar'd to +these+ by many parts:
Three ages, such as mortall men contriue,
With these in praise of pollicies mote striue.
And counselled faire _Alma_, how to gouerne well.
alive)
the Greek heroes who overthrew Troy)
Greeks before he came to advise Agamemnon (_Iliad_ 1.247-52))
The first of them could things to come foresee:
The third things past could keepe in memoree,
But that the same could one of these comprize.
That nought mote hinder his quicke preiudize:
That neuer idle was, ne once +could+ rest a whit.
His chamber was dispainted all within,
Infinite shapes of things dispersed thin;
Ne can deuized be of mortall wit;
Such as in idle fantasies doe flit:
Apes, Lions, {AE}gles, Owles, fooles, louers, children, Dames.
and the lower parts of a horse}
perhaps this is a new creature, invented by Spenser, half horse
and half woman, the female counterpart of the centaur.
"Centaurs" and "Hippodames" are the only words italicized in the
original stanza.  See also 311.40:9)
And all the chamber filled was with flyes,
That they encombred all mens eares and eyes,
After their hiues with honny do abound:
Deuices, dreames, opinions vnsound,
And all that fained is, as leasings, tales, and lies.
crotchets, fancies, inventions, and dreamy theories." (Brewer,
Emongst them all sate he, which wonned there,
A man of yeares yet fresh, as mote appere,
That him full of melancholy did shew;
That mad or foolish seemd: one by his vew
When oblique _Saturne_ sate in +the house+ of agonyes.
whose proportions in the body, according to medieval physiology,
determine one's constitution}
with respect to the celestial equator; also: deviating from right
conduct or thought}
astrological house, associated with adversity and death.  A
"house" in astrology is a sign of the zodiac considered as the
seat of the greatest influence of a particular planet, each of
the planets of the ancients having two such houses, a day house
and a night house.  Pisces might thus be a house of Saturn)
Whom _Alma_ hauing shewed to her guestes,
Were painted faire with memorable gestes,
Of Magistrates, of courts, of tribunals,
Of lawes, of iudgements, and of decretals;
And all that in the world was aye thought wittily.
Of those that roome was full, and them among
Who did them meditate all his life long,
He now was growne right wise, and wondrous sage.
His goodly reason, and graue personage,
But _Alma_ thence them led to th'hindmost roome of three.
That chamber seemed ruinous and old,
Yet were the wals, that did the same vphold,
And therein sate an old oldman, halfe blind,
Yet liuely vigour rested in his mind,
Weake body well is chang'd for minds redoubled forse.
This man of infinite remembrance was,
Which he recorded still, as they did pas,
As all things else, the which this world doth weld,
Where they for euer incorrupted dweld:
Of old _Assaracus_, and _Inachus_ diuine.
Nineveh)
Troy); the great-grandfather of Aeneas.  See _Iliad_ 20.231-40)
The yeares of _Nestor_ nothing were to his,
For he remembred both their infancies:
Of natiue strength now, that he them suruiu'd.
And old records from auncient times deriu'd,
That were all worme-eaten, and full of canker holes.
Amidst them all he in a chaire was set,
But for he was vnhable them to fet,
To reach, when euer he for ought did send;
That boy them sought, and vnto him did lend.
And that old man _Eumnestes_, by their propertis.
The knights there entring, did him reuerence dew
Then as they gan his Librarie to vew,
There chaunced to the Princes hand to rize,
That of this lands first conquest did deuize,
Till it reduced was to one mans gouernments.
Sir _Guyon_ chaunst eke on another booke,
In which when as he greedily did +looke,+
As it deliuered was from hond to hond:
Their countries auncestry to vnderstond,
To read those bookes; who gladly graunted their desire.
_A chronicle of Briton kings,
And rolles of Elfin Emperours,
principally the twelfth-century _Historia Regum Britanniae_
(_HRB_) by Geoffrey of Monmouth, and Elizabethan sources such as
Holinshed's _Chronicles_.  A full account is in Harper (1910),
abstracted in _Var._ 301-34, 449-53; Hamilton (1980) provides
further comment)
Aeneas)
WHo now shall giue vnto me words and sound,
Or who shal lend me wings, with which from ground
And lift it selfe vnto the highest skies?
Here needes me, whiles the famous auncestries
By which all earthly Princes she doth farre surmount.
Ne vnder Sunne, that shines so wide and faire,
Liues ought, that to her linage may compaire,
Yet doth it selfe stretch forth to heauens hight,
A labour huge, exceeding farre my might:
Conceiue such soueraine glory, and great bountihed?
Argument worthy of _M{oe}onian_ quill,
Whereon the ruines of great _Ossa_ hill,
That all the Gods admird his loftie note.
His learned daughters would to me report,
Thy name, {o^} soueraine Queene, to blazon farre away.
and is also known as "Maeonides")
violin; hence: lyre, phorminx}
Kisavo); the Giants, in attempting to scale Mount Olympus, piled
it on the neighbouring Mount Pelion (Virgil, _Georgics_ 1.281))
Giants attacked the gods; see 507.10:5)
Vulcan and his Cyclopes)
Apollo, for in later accounts he is the leader of the choir of
Muses, and receives the name of Musagetes as a result.  According
to _Myth._ 4.10, the Muses are the children of Apollo rather than
of Jupiter)
opening stanzas of 210, which themselves comprise a sort of
proem)
Thy name {o^} soueraine Queene, thy realme and race,
+Who+ mightily vpheld that royall mace,
From mightie kings and conquerours in warre,
Whose noble deedes aboue the Northerne starre
As in that old mans booke they were in order told.
The land, which warlike Britons now possesse,
In antique times was saluage wildernesse,
Ne was it Island then, ne was it paysd
Of marchants farre, for profits therein praysd,
By sea to haue bene from the _Celticke_ mayn-land brought.
Ne did it then deserue a name to haue,
Learning his ship from those white rocks to saue,
Threatning vnheedie wrecke and rash decay,
And namd it _Albion_.  But later day
Gan more the same frequent, and further to inuade.
that it derives from the Latin _albus_, white, and was given to
England by Julius Caesar in allusion to the cliffs, is refuted by
mention of "Albion" in _De Mundo_, a Greek treatise formerly
attributed to Aristotle, written three hundred years before
Caesar's invasion.  The name is certainly very old)
But farre in land a saluage nation dwelt,
That neuer tasted grace, nor goodnesse felt,
And flying fast as Roebucke through the fen,
By hunting and by spoiling liued then;
That sonnes of men amazd their sternnesse to behold.
But whence they sprong, or how they were begot,
That monstrous error, which doth some assot,
Into this land by chaunce haue driuen bene,
Through vaine illusion of their lust vnclene,
As farre exceeded men in their immeasurd mights.
emperor 284-305; noted for his persecution of Christians.  His
thirty-three daughters, like the fifty daughters of Danaus, are
said to have murdered their bridegrooms; except for Albine, from
whom Albion derived.  See also 105.35:9)
They held this land, and with their filthinesse
That their owne mother loathd their beastlinesse,
All were they borne of her owne natiue slime;
From royall stocke of old +_Assaracs_+ line,
And them of their vniust possession depriu'd.
that he killed his father in a hunting accident and was
subsequently banished from Italy: see _HRB_ 1.3)
But ere he had established his throne,
He fought great battels with his saluage fone;
And many Giants left on groning flore;
The westerne Hogh, besprincled with the gore
_Corineus_ conquered, and cruelly did slay.
accompanied Antenor (_Aen._ 1.241); joined company with Brutus in
Etruria)
And eke that ample Pit, yet farre renownd,
_Coulin_ to make, being eight lugs of grownd;
But those three monstrous stones doe most excell
Whose father _Hercules_ in Fraunce did quell,
At bold _Canutus_; but of him was slaine anon.
metres}
name for England)
In meed of these great conquests by them got,
To him assigned for his worthy lot,
He called _Cornewaile_, yet so called best:
But _Canute_ had his portion from the rest,
Now _Cantium_, which Kent we commenly inquire.
corner of England); out of (since Cornwall and Devon form the SW
peninsula of England)
Thus _Brute_ this Realme vnto his rule subdewd,
Lou'd of his friends, and of his foes eschewd,
Borne of faire _Inogene_ of _Italy_;
And _Locrine_ left chiefe Lord of _Britany_.
His life, and long good fortune vnto finall fate.
Loegria or Logris, roughly corresponding to modern England)
_Locrine_ was left the soueraine Lord of all;
Which of himselfe _Albania_ he did call;
Which _Seuerne_ now from _Logris_ doth depart:
Ne was there outward breach, nor grudge in hart,
But each his paines to others profit still employd.
miles to the sea, disemboguing into the Bristol Channel)
Vntill a nation straung, with visage swart,
Which through the world then swarmd in euery part,
Like _Noyes_ great flood, with their importune sway,
And did themselues through all the North display:
Did head against them make, and strong +munifience+.
He them encountred, a confused rout,
The auncient _Abus_, where with courage stout
And chaste so fiercely after fearefull flight,
(Their Chieftaine _Humber_ named was aright)
Where he an end of battell, and of life did make.
The king returned proud of victorie,
That shortly he forgot the ieopardie,
And fell to vaine voluptuous disease:
Whose wanton pleasures him too much did please,
From _Guendolene_ his wife, though alwaies faithfull prou'd.
The noble daughter of _Corineus_
But gathering force, and courage valorous,
In which him vanquisht she to fly constraind:
And threw in bands, where he till death remaind;
She ouerhent, nought moued with her piteous looke.
But both her selfe, and eke her daughter deare,
The faire _Sabrina_ almost dead with feare,
The one she slew +in that impatient stoure+,
Adowne the rolling riuer she did poure,
Such was the end, that to disloyall loue did fall.
without further ado:_ present _= immediate;_ floure _= floor_
See Drayton's _Polyolbion_ and Fletcher's _Faithful Shepherdess_;
and _Comus_ 824 ff.)
Then for her sonne, which she to _Locrin_ bore,
In her owne hand the crowne she kept in store,
During which time her powre she did display
And first taught men a woman to obay:
She it surrendred, ne her selfe would lenger vex.
Tho _Madan_ raignd, vnworthie of his race:
Next _Memprise_, as vnworthy of that place,
For thirst of single kingdome him he kild.
With noble deedes, and warreyd on _Brunchild_
Braue moniments remaine, which yet that land enuies.
An happie man in his first dayes he was,
For all so many weekes as the yeare has,
Of which were twentie sonnes, which did +apply,+
Those germans did subdew all Germany,
With foule repulse from Fraunce was forced to retire.
Which blot his sonne succeeding in his seat,
And eke in semblance of his puissance great,
With recompence of euerlasting fame.
The bowels of wide Fraunce, a forlorne Dame,
Since which, with sundrie spoiles she hath beene ransacked.
Let _Scaldis_ tell, and let tell _Hania_,
What colour were their waters that same day,
With bloud of _Henalois_, which therein fell.
The greene shield dyde in dolorous vermell?
But +rather _y Scuith gogh_, signe of sad crueltee+.
Belgium, and in the Netherlands flows into the North Sea; length
c. 270 miles)
His sonne king _Leill_ by fathers labour long,
And built _Cairleill_, and built _Cairleon_ strong.
But taught the land from wearie warres to cease.
Exceld at _Athens_ all the learned preace,
And with sweet science mollifide their stubborne harts.
Ensample of his wondrous faculty,
Which seeth with secret fire eternally,
Nourish the flames, which they are warm'd vpon,
And health to euery forreine nation:
The reach of men, through flight into fond mischief fell.
not quite up to this and he crashed into the temple of Apollo,
with terminal results)
Next him king _Leyr_ in happie peace long raind,
But three faire daughters, which were well vptraind,
Mongst whom his realme he equally decreed
Nigh to his vtmost date he saw proceed,
Inquyrd, which of them most did loue her parentage.
Caer-leir (i.e. Learchester, the modern Leicester; see note on
Colchester at 210.58:9).  The story of Lear and his daughters is
a Buddhist parable of great antiquity)
The eldest +_Gonorill_+ gan to protest,
And _Regan_ greater loue to him profest,
But _Cordeill_ said she lou'd him, as behoou'd:
To paint it forth, him to displeasance moou'd,
But twixt the other twaine his kingdome whole did shaire.
So wedded th'one to _Maglan_ king of Scots,
And twixt them shayrd his realme by equall lots:
Was sent to _Aganip_ of _Celtica_.
A priuate life led in _Albania_,
That nought him grieu'd to bene from rule deposed downe.
But true it is, that when the oyle is spent,
So when he had resignd his regiment,
And wearie +waxe+ of his continuall stay.
Who him at first well vsed euery way;
Her bountie she abated, and his cheare empayrd.
reception; _also:_ viands, food (a fine example of Spenser's
talent for finding _le mot juste_)
The wretched man gan then auise too late,
Too truely tryde in his extreamest state;
He to _Cordelia_ him selfe addrest,
As for her Syre and king her seemed best;
To war on those, which him had of his realme bereau'd.
So to his crowne she him restor'd againe,
And after wild, it should to her remaine:
And all mens harts in dew obedience held:
Through proud ambition, against her rebeld,
Till wearie of that wretched life, her selfe she hong.
Then gan the bloudie brethren both to raine:
His brother _Morgan_, prickt with proud disdaine,
And kindling coles of cruell enmitie,
Whence as he to those woodie hils did flie,
Then did he raigne alone, when he none equall knew.
His sonne +_Riuallo_+ his dead roome did supply,
Next great _Gurgustus_, then faire _C{ae}cily_
After whom _Lago_, and _Kinmarke_ did raine,
+Till+ his ambitious sonnes vnto them twaine,
Stout _Ferrex_ and sterne _Porrex_ him in prison threw.
first English tragedy, _Gorboduc_, acted in 1561, and printed in
to whom one of Spenser's dedicatory sonnets is addressed: see
I:588 ff.)
But {o^}, the greedy thirst of royall crowne,
Stird _Porrex_ vp to put his brother downe;
Made warre on him, and fell him selfe in fight:
Most mercilesse of women, _Wyden_ hight,
And with most cruell hand him murdred pittilesse.
Here ended _Brutus_ sacred progenie,
With high renowme, and great +felicitie;+
Through discord, and the royall throne forlorne:
Whilest each of _Brutus_ boasted to be borne,
Of _Brutus_, nor of Britons glory auncient.
Brutus's lineage could be traced back to Aeneas (whose father,
Anchises, was a mortal, and whose mother, Venus, was a goddess)}
Then vp arose a man of matchlesse might,
Who stird +with+ pitty of the stressed plight
By such, as claymd themselues _Brutes_ rightfull haires,
To taken counsell of their common cares;
Their king, and swore him fealty to win or loose.
Then made he head against his enimies,
Then _Ruddoc_ and proud _Stater_, both allyes,
And that of _Cambry_ king confirmed late,
Whose countreis he redus'd to quiet state,
Now one, which earst were many, made through variaunce.
Then made he sacred lawes, which some men say
By which he freed the Traueilers high way,
Restraining stealth, and strong extortion;
For till his dayes, the chiefe dominion
Therefore he first wore crowne of gold for dignitie.
giver who reigned peacefully for 39 (or 43) years and was revered
for his wisdom and piety)
pejorative use at 104.12:7)
_Donwallo_ dyde (for what may liue for ay?)
That sacked _Rome_ too dearely did assay,
And ransackt _Greece_ well tryde, when they were wroth;
Which yet their prayses speake, all be they loth,
Of _Brennus_ and _Bellinus_, kings of Britany.
Next them did +_Gurgunt_+, great _Bellinus_ sonne
He Easterland subdewd, and +Danmarke+ wonne,
The which was dew in his dead fathers dayes:
Whom he at sea found wandring from their wayes,
Which they should hold of him, as subiect to _Britayne_.
separately; cf. 210.63)
After him raigned _Guitheline_ his hayre,
Who had to wife Dame _Mertia_ the fayre,
Which for this Realme found many goodly layes,
Her many deemd to haue beene of the _Fayes_,
Those yet of her be _Mertian_ lawes both nam'd and thought.
mythology, identified with the Greek Muses), from whom Numa
received instruction)
Her +sonne+ +_Sisillus_+ after her did rayne,
Next whom _Morindus_ did the crowne sustaine,
And cruell rancour dim'd his valorous
As well in that same field victorious
Yet liues his memorie, though carcas sleepe in rest.
invading Morini)
Fiue +sonnes+ he left begotten of one wife,
First _Gorboman_ a man of vertuous life;
Deposed was from Princedome soueraine,
Who shortly it to him restord againe,
But _Peridure_ and _Vigent_ him disthronized.
In wretched prison long he did remaine,
And then therein reseized was againe,
Till he surrendred Realme and life to fate.
By dew successe, and all their Nephewes late,
Till aged _Hely_ by dew heritage it gaynd.
He had two sonnes, whose eldest called _Lud_
And endlesse moniments of his great good:
Of _Troynouant_, gainst force of enimy,
By which he lyes entombed solemnly.
_Androgeus_ and _Tenantius_, pictures of his might.
legend)
word derives from the old British "Tri-nouhant", meaning
"inhabitants of the new town".  In Layamon's _Brut_ the name is
spelled "Trinovant" and derives from the Trinovantes; but their
principal town was not London, but Colchester, in Essex)
Whilst they were young, _Cassibalane_ their Eme
Who on him tooke the royall Diademe,
Till the prowd _Romanes_ him disquieted,
Of this sweet Island, neuer conquered,
(O hideous hunger of dominion) hither came.
Yet twise they were repulsed backe againe,
The whiles with bloud they all the shore did +staine,+
Ne had they footing found at last perdie,
And enuious of Vncles soueraintie,
Nought else, but treason, from the first this land did foyle.
So by him _C{ae}sar_ got the victory,
In which him selfe was charged heauily
But lost his sword, yet to be seene this day.
T'ambitious _Rome_, and did their rule obay,
Yet oft the Briton kings against them strongly swayd.
Nennius)
Next him _Tenantius_ raigned, then _Kimbeline_,
Enwombed was, from wretched _Adams_ line
O ioyous memorie of happy time,
(O too high ditty for my simple rime.)
For that their tribute he refusd to let be payd.
the use at 306.5:7 is more orthodox.  See also 201.50:8)
Good _Claudius_, that next was Emperour,
In which the king was by a Treachetour
Yet ceased not the bloudy fight for ought;
+Both in his armes, and+ crowne, and by that draught
That they to peace agreed.  So all was pacifide.
eke in _1609_
Britain in 43)
length; a move at chess}
Was neuer king more highly magnifide,
For which the Emperour to him allide
Yet shortly he renounst the vassalage
_Vespasian_, that with great spoile and rage
Perswaded him to ceasse, and her Lord to relent.
became emperor himself and ruled from 69 until his death.  During
this period, Agricola (37-93) achieved his military victories in
Britain)
He dyde; and him succeeded _Marius_,
Then _Coyll_, and after him good _Lucius_,
The sacred pledge of Christes Euangely:
Hither came _Ioseph_ of _Arimathy_,
And preacht the truth, but since it greatly did decay.
which Joseph is said to have received Christ's blood at the cross.
A persistent medieval legend has Joseph bringing the Sangreal,
and with it Christianity, to Glastonbury in western England)
This good king shortly without issew dide,
That did her selfe in sundry parts diuide,
Whilest _Romanes_ dayly did the weake subdew:
And taking armes, the _Britons_ to her drew;
And them vnwares besides the _Seuerne_ did enclose.
a result of atrocities committed by the Romans against the Iceni
tribe in East Anglia, in 61 AD she led an army of 80,000 Britons
into battle against Suetonius's 14th and 20th Legions; the field,
near the present site of Daventry, in Northamptonshire, saw the
death of 400 Romans and some 70,000 Britons.  However, final
subjugation by Rome was not achieved until 83 AD)
There she with them a cruell battell tride,
By reason that the Captaines on her side,
Yet such, as were through former flight +preseru'd+,
And with fresh courage on the victour seru'd:
Rather then fly, or be captiu'd her selfe she slew.
O famous moniment of womens prayse,
Whom antique history so high doth raise,
Her Host two hundred thousand numbred is;
Triumphed oft against her enimis;
She triumphed on death, in enemies despight.
her second husband.  Before she acceded to the throne she
successfully led the daring siege of Bactra; five days after her
accession she had Ninus murdered.  She went on to conquer many
nations in Asia, subdued Egypt and much of Ethiopia besides.
Some of her exploits are the same as those attributed to the
goddess Ishtar; Semiramis herself was said to be a daughter of
the Syrian goddess Dekarat.  Her name derives from the Syrian
_Sammu-ramat_.  See also 105.50:3-4)
thus saved her father when the Lemnian women killed all the men
in the island)
coast of the Caspian Sea.  In a battle in 529 BC she decapitated
Cyrus, the founder of the Persian Empire, and threw his head into
a bag of human blood, so that, as she said, he might finally
satiate himself with it.  (This follows Herodotus rather than
Xenophon))
Her reliques _Fulgent_ hauing gathered,
Yet in the chace was slaine of them, that fled:
Then gan _Carausius_ tirannize anew,
But him _Allectus_ treacherously slew,
Nath'lesse the same enioyed but short happy howre:
Spent the last three years of his life in Britain, and died at
Eboracum (York))
seized control of Britain and proclaimed himself emperor, between
murdered in 293, taking the robe for himself.  Three years later
he was killed near London by Roman soldiers)
For _Asclepiodate_ him ouercame,
Without or robe, or rag, to hide his shame.
But shortly was by _Coyll_ in battell slaine:
Was of the _Britons_ first crownd Soueraine:
He of his name _Coylchester_ built of stone and lime.
(?250-306), who was the general who really recovered Britain from
Allectus)
popular in the 18th century)
the first Roman city in Britain to be given the rank of a
colonia.  The suffix "chester" derives from the Latin _castra_,
applied to a walled town, especially one that had been a Roman
station in Britain; Colchester was originally called
"Colnecaster", after its river, the Colne)
Which when the _Romanes_ heard, they hither sent
With whom king _Coyll_ made an agreement,
Faire _Helena_, the fairest liuing wight;
Did far excell, but was most famous hight
Aswell in curious instruments, as cunning layes.
Eboracum (York) fighting the Picts)
of Caesar in 292, divorced her in order to marry Theodora, the
stepdaughter of Maximian.  On the elevation of her son,
Constantine, however, Helena received the title of Augusta.  She
made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem in about 325, and built there the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre and the Church of the Nativity; she
was subsequently made a saint)
Of whom he did great _Constantine_ beget,
To which whiles absent he his mind did set,
And it vsurped by vnrighteous doome:
Slaying _Traherne_, and hauing ouercome
So settled he his kingdome, and confirmd his right.
But wanting issew male, his daughter +deare,+
And him with her made of his kingdome heyre,
Till murdred by the friends of _Gratian_;
During the raigne of _Maximinian_;
But that they ouerran all parts with easie hand.
Roman emperor 286-305 and 306-308; died 310)
by Maximian)
probably arrived from mainland Europe c. 1000 BC.  Fought against
the Romans in Britain in the 4th century AD.  They are said to
have received their name (Latin, _Picti_) from their custom of
ornamenting their bodies with tattoos; they are also known for
cannibalism and the fact that Pictish women fought alongside the
men in battle)
The weary _Britons_, whose war-hable youth
With wretched miseries, and woefull ruth,
And dayly spectacle of sad decay:
And more had wasted, could no whit dismay;
They crownd the second _Constantine_ with ioyous teares,
emperor 337-340)
Who hauing oft in battell vanquished
Long time in peace his Realme established,
Of neighbour Scots, and forrein Scatterlings,
Which to outbarre, with painefull pyonings
Which from _Alcluid_ to _Panwelt_ did that border bound.
its original sense, i.e. digging trenches, preparing the way for
the main army)
Three sonnes he dying left, all vnder age;
Vsurpt the crowne, during their pupillage;
Them closely into _Armorick_ did beare:
He sent to _Germanie_, straunge aid to reare,
Of _Saxons_, whom he for his safetie imployes.
enlisted the aid of the Jutes, under Hengest and Horsa, in the
fight of the Britons against the Picts and the Scots.  However,
the name "Vortigern" may well refer to more than one historical
character, and may have been a mere title)
and Uther Pendragon, Constans having been murdered by order of
Vortigern)
France, between the mouths of the Seine and Loire.  Later this
name became more or less synonymous with that of Brittany)
described as "large ships", and "brigandines, or long galleys,
full of armed men" at _HRB_ 8.10.  The landing is generally
believed to have been in the year 449.  The main force of Saxons
arrived later)
originally inhabitants of the lower Elbe Valley.  They were a
warlike people who spread mainly to the south and west; they
landed in Britain in 449.  By the end of the sixth century they
had conquered most of NW Europe.  With the Angles and the Jutes
they established the beginnings of Anglo-Saxon culture in
England)
Two brethren were their +Capitains+, which hight
And both of them men of renowmed might;
And of those forreiners, which came from farre,
That in the Realme ere long they stronger arre,
And _Vortiger_ +enforst+ the kingdome to aband.
kingdom of Kent.  Died 488)
But by the helpe of _Vortimere_ his sonne,
And _Hengist_ seeming sad, for that was donne,
Through his faire daughters face, and flattring word;
Of British bloud, all sitting at his bord;
Th'eternall markes of treason may at _Stonheng_ vew.
represented the murdered men)
By this the sonnes of _Constantine_, which fled,
And here arriuing, strongly challenged
Who flying from his guilt, by them was +slaine,+
Thenceforth _Aurelius_ peaceably did rayne,
So now entombed lyes at Stoneheng by the heath.
Britain, Gaul and Spain under Honorius.  He led the Britons
against the Saxon invasion.  Poisoned at Winchester by a Saxon)
After him _Vther_, which _Pendragon_ hight,
Without full point, or other Cesure right,
Or th'Authour selfe could not at least attend
The Prince him selfe halfe +seemeth+ to offend,
And wonder of antiquitie long stopt his speach.
chronicle)
surmounting his helmet: "pen" = "head" in the Brythonic language.
_HRB_ 8.17 records that Uther caused golden dragons to be made in
commemoration of Merlin's prophecy that a comet with a dragon-
shaped effulgence portended his accession.  One of these dragons
he carried with him in his wars)
At last quite rauisht with delight, to heare
Cryde out, Deare countrey, {o^} how dearely deare
Be to thy foster Childe, that from thy hand
How brutish is it not to vnderstand,
That gaue vnto vs all, what euer good we haue.
the land)
But _Guyon_ all this while his booke did read,
And ample volume, that doth far excead
It told, how first _Prometheus_ did create
And then stole fire from heauen, to animate
Of life him selfe, and hart-strings of an {AE}gle riued.
heaven in a hollow tube, and taught mortals how to use it.  In
one legend, he is said to have created man out of earth and
water, and to have bestowed on him a portion of the
characteristics possessed by all the other animals.  See
_Odes_ I 16.13-16, _Met._ 1.82)
the heart rather than the liver, Spenser follows Cooper (1565)}
chained to a rock on Mount Caucasus, where each day an eagle
consumed his liver, which was then restored overnight.  The eagle
was eventually killed, and Prometheus rescued, by Hercules)
That man so made, he called _Elfe_, to weet
Who wandring through the world with wearie feet,
A goodly creature, whom he deemd in mind
Or Angell, th'authour of all woman kind;
Of whom all _Faeryes_ spring, and fetch their lignage right.
Of these a mightie people shortly grew,
And to them selues all Nations did subdew:
Was _Elfin_; him all _India_ obayd,
Next him was noble _Elfinan_, who layd
But _Elfiline_ enclosd it with a golden wall.
His sonne was _Elfinell_, who ouercame
But _Elfant_ was of most renowmed fame,
Then _Elfar_, who two brethren gyants kild,
Then _Elfinor_, who was in Magick skild;
A bridge of bras, whose sound heauens thunder seem'd to +bee.+
"Nonesuch", "Nonpareil".  Possibly identifiable as Westminster
Abbey or the Queen's Palace of Richmond)
passing over the bridge.  The allegory is unclear)
He left three sonnes, the which in order raynd,
Euen seuen hundred Princes, which maintaynd
That were too long their infinite contents
Yet should they be most famous moniments,
And ciuill rule to kings and states imperiall.
After all these _Elficleos_ did rayne,
Who mightily that scepter did sustayne,
Did high aduaunce the crowne of _Faery_:
The eldest brother did vntimely dy;
Doubly supplide, in spousall, and dominion.
Bordeaux_, and later in _A Midsummer-night's Dream_.  As the
reputed son of Julius Caesar and Morgan le Fay, King Oberon
provides the link between the classical world and Arthur's line.
Elizabeth's conflation with Gloriana is thus rendered complete)
Great was his power and glorie ouer all,
That yet remaines his wide memoriall:
Him to succeede therein, by his last will:
Ne like in grace, ne like in learned skill;
Long mayst thou _Glorian_ liue, in glory and great powre.
Oberon's lineage could be traced back to a supernatural being;
cf. 210.36:1}
type for Gloriana as the Faery Queen.  Hence, allegorically:
Elizabeth, so that Oberon becomes identifiable with Henry VIII
and Elficleos with Henry VII)
Beguild thus with delight of nouelties,
So long they red in those antiquities,
Till +gentle+ _Alma_ seeing it so late,
To thinke, how supper did them long awaite.
And fairely feasted, as so +noble+ knights she ought.
_The enimies of Temperaunce
Prince Arthur them repelles, and fowle
unwell; _aeger_, sick, unwell, unsound)
WHat warre so cruell, or what siege so sore,
Against the fort of reason euermore
Their force is fiercer through infirmitie
And exercise most bitter tyranny
No wretchednesse is like to sinfull vellenage.
"private parts" may also be intended: cf. 202.37:5)
But in a body, which doth freely yeeld
And letteth her that ought the scepter weeld,
Is setled there in sure establishment;
Doth florish in all beautie excellent:
Attempred goodly well for health and +for+ delight.
Early before the Morne with cremosin ray,
Through which into the world the dawning day
Vprose Sir _Guyon_, in bright armour clad,
With him the Palmer eke in habit sad,
So to the riuers side they both together far'd.
Where them awaited ready at the ford
With his well rigged boate: They go abord,
Ere long they rowed were quite out of sight,
But let them pas, whiles wind and weather right
To see a cruell fight doen by the Prince this day.
For all so soone, as _Guyon_ thence was gon
That wicked band of villeins fresh begon
And lay strong siege about it far and wide.
That all the land they vnder them did hide;
Their visages imprest, when they approched neare.
Them in twelue troupes their Captain did dispart
Where each might best offend his proper part,
As euery one seem'd meetest in that cace.
In strong entrenchments he did closely place,
They battred day and night, and entraunce did awate.
The other fiue, fiue sundry wayes he set,
And vnto each a Bulwarke did arret,
In hope thereof to win victorious spoile.
With greedie malice and importune toyle,
With which they dayly made most dreadfull battery.
The first troupe was a monstrous rablement
Headed like Owles, with +beckes+ vncomely bent,
And some had wings, and some had clawes to teare,
And euery one did bow and arrowes beare:
And couetous aspectes, all cruell enimies.
an eagle, believed by the Greeks to guard the Scythian gold;
traditionally watchful and perseverant}
Those same against the bulwarke of the _Sight_
Ne once did yield it respit day nor night,
And soone againe as he his light with hault,
That is each thing, by which the eyes may fault,
Beautie, and money, +they that Bulwarke sorely rent+.
_1590_
deceptions
The second Bulwarke was the _Hearing_ sence,
Deformed creatures, in straunge difference,
Some like wild Bores late rouzd out of the brakes;
Leasings, backbytings, and vaine-glorious crakes,
All those against that fort did bend their batteries.
Likewise that same third Fort, that is the _Smell_
Whose hideous shapes were like to feends of hell,
Some like to Puttockes, all in plumes arayd:
For by those vgly formes weren pourtrayd,
Which do that sence besiege with light illusions.
Church suggests that _dismayd_ = "dismayed" and that _Some like
to hounds, some like to Apes, _should be read parenthetically, so
that _dismayd_, or _mismayd_, refers to the _feends of hell_; cf.
formerly common in England)
And that fourth band, which cruell battry bent,
Was as the rest, a grysie rablement,
Like loathly Toades, some fashioned in the wast
+Surfeat+, misdiet, and vnthriftie wast,
All those this sences Fort assayle incessantly.
But the fift troupe most horrible of hew,
For some like Snailes, some did like spyders shew,
+Cruelly they+ +assayled+ that fift Fort,
With stings of carnall lust, and strong effort
Against that same fift bulwarke they continued fight.
Thus these twelue troupes with dreadfull puissance
And euermore their hideous Ordinance
That now it gan to threaten neare decay:
Prouoked them the breaches to assay,
Which by the ransack of that peece they should attaine.
(cf. 211.10:9, 211.12:1)
On th'other side, th'assieged Castles ward
And many bold repulse, and many hard
That goodly frame from ruine to sustaine:
The walles so stoutly with their sturdie maine,
But they to direfull death their groning ghosts did send.
The noble virgin, Ladie of +the+ place,
For neuer was she in so euill cace,
Gan her recomfort from so sad affright,
For her defence, against that Carle to fight,
She him remercied as the Patrone of her life.
Eftsoones himselfe in glitterand armes he dight,
So taking courteous conge he behight,
Faire mote he thee, the prowest and most gent,
Whom soone as that vnruly rablement,
They reard a most outrageous dreadfull yelling cry.
And therewith all attonce at him let fly
And round about him flocke impetuously,
From the high mountaines, threats to ouerflow
And the sad husbandmans long hope doth throw
Nor bounds nor banks his headlong ruine may sustaine.
Vpon his shield their heaped hayle he bore,
Which fled a sunder, and him fell before,
When the wroth Western wind does reaue their locks;
The fierce _Spumador_ trode them downe like docks,
Such as _Laomedon_ of _Ph{oe}bus_ race did breed.
_Aen._ 6.881)
Ganymede, the beautiful youth carried off by Zeus (Jupiter).  In
compensation Jupiter gave Laomedon a pair of divine horses, such
as those which draw Phoebus's fiery chariot across the sky)
sentenced for a time to watch Laomedon's flocks on Mount Ida)
Which suddeine horrour and confused cry,
The cause to weet, and fault to remedy;
That as the winde ran vnderneath his lode,
Full large he was of limbe, and shoulders brode,
That like a ghost he seem'd, whose graue-clothes were vnbound.
And in his hand a bended bow was seene,
All deadly daungerous, all cruell keene,
Such as the _Indians_ in their quiuers hide;
And bid them strike the marke, which he had eyde,
That mote recure their wounds: so inly they did tine.
As pale and wan as ashes was his looke,
And skin all withered like a dryed rooke,
That seem'd to tremble euermore, and quake:
And girded with a belt of twisted brake,
Made of a dead mans skull, that seem'd a ghastly sight.
around farmsteads; the partly feathered squabs were formerly much
taken as food, sometimes being dried and put in store)
_Maleger_ was his name, and after him,
With hoarie lockes all loose, and visage grim;
And both as swift on foot, as chased Stags;
Which with a staffe, all full of litle snags
But th'other was _Impatience_, arm'd with raging flame.
meanings of this word)
Soone as the Carle from farre the Prince espyde,
His Beast he felly prickt on either syde,
With which at him a cruell shaft he sent:
Vpon his shield, that it no further went,
Then he another and another did expell.
crossbow, a weapon favoured by the medieval French and greatly
disdained by English longbowmen)
Which to preuent, the Prince his mortall speare
To be auenged of that shot whyleare:
That bitter stownd, but turning quicke aside
Whom to pursue, the Infant after hide,
But labour lost it was, to weene approch him neare.
For as the winged wind his Tigre fled,
Ne scarse his feet on ground were seene to tred;
Ne hedge ne ditch his readie passage brake,
(As wonts the _Tartar_ by the _Caspian_ lake,
Vnto his Tygres taile, and shot at him apace.
Parthians, who, like the Tartars, were inhabitants of western
Apace he shot, and yet he fled apace,
And oftentimes he would relent his pace,
+Who+ when his vncouth manner he did vew,
But keepe his standing, and his shaftes eschew,
And then assayle him fresh, ere he could shift for more.
speed)
But that lame Hag, still as abroad he strew
And to him brought, fresh battell to renew:
From yielding succour to that cursed Swaine,
But soone as him dismounted on the plaine,
Binding her sister, she to him ran hastily.
attendant, serf (of the hags); lover (of the lame hag)
And catching hold of him, as downe he lent,
With their rude hands and griesly graplement,
Vpon him fell, and lode vpon him layd;
And of the battell balefull end had made,
And commen to his reskew, ere his bitter bane.
So greatest and most glorious thing on ground
So feeble is mans state, and life vnsound,
Till it dissolued be from earthly band.
And noblest borne of all in _Briton_ land;
That had not grace thee blest, thou shouldest not +suruiue+.
space where it can be killed)
The Squire arriuing, fiercely in his armes
His chiefest lets and authors of his harmes,
Least that his Lord they should behind inuade;
As one awakt out of long slombring shade,
Vnited all his powres to purge himselfe from blame.
and often also applied to Fortune, Nature, etc. personified}
Like as a fire, the which in hollow caue
With murmurous disdaine doth inly raue,
At last breakes forth with furious +vnrest+,
All that did earst it hinder and molest,
And carries into smoake with rage and horror great.
Air, and Water)
So mightily the _Briton_ Prince him rouzd
And as a Beare whom angry curres haue touzd,
Becomes more fell, and all that him withstands
Alighted from his Tigre, and his hands
To seize vpon his foe flat lying on the marle.
Which now him turnd to disauantage deare;
But trust vnto his strength and manhood meare,
And of his weapons did himselfe disarme.
Fiercely aduaunst his valorous right arme,
That groueling to the ground he fell, and fild his place.
Well weened he, that field was then his owne,
When suddein vp the villein ouerthrowne,
And gan himselfe to second battell bend,
An huge great stone, which stood vpon one end,
Some land-marke seem'd to be, or signe of sundry way.
(indifferently, in the sense "some road or other")
The same he snatcht, and with exceeding sway
To shunne the engin of his meant decay;
But ground he gaue, and lightly leapt areare:
That once hath failed of her souse full neare,
And vnto better fortune doth her selfe prepaire.
So braue returning, with his brandisht blade,
And strooke at him so sternely, that he made
That halfe the steele behind his back did rest;
When the hart bloud should gush out of his chest,
But his dead corse vpon the flore fell nathemore.
Ne drop of bloud appeared shed to bee,
That through his carkasse one might plainely see:
And halfe in rage, to be deluded thus,
That made his spright to grone full piteous:
But freshly as at first, prepard himselfe to fight.
Thereat he smitten was with great affright,
Ne wist he, what to thinke of that same sight,
He doubted, least it were some magicall
Or wandring ghost, that wanted funerall,
Or hellish feend raysd vp through diuelish science.
His wonder farre exceeded reasons reach,
And oft of error did himselfe appeach:
Wounds without hurt, a bodie without might,
That could not die, yet seem'd a mortall wight,
Like did he neuer heare, like did he neuer see.
A while he stood in this astonishment,
Giue ouer to effect his first intent,
Or th'vtmost issew of his owne decay.
At need, till now, he lightly threw away,
And with his naked hands him forcibly assayld.
Twixt his two mightie armes him vp he snatcht,
That the disdainfull soule he thence dispatcht,
Tho when he felt him dead, +a downe+ he kest
Adowne he kest it with so puissant wrest,
And gaue against his mother earth a gronefull sownd.
As when _Ioues_ harnesse-bearing Bird from hie
The stone-dead quarrey fals so forciblie,
A second fall redoubling backe againe.
And that he victor onely did remaine;
Gan heap huge strokes on him, as ere he downe was cast.
Nigh his wits end then woxe th'amazed knight,
Against this lifelesse shadow so to fight:
That whiles he marueild still, did still him paine:
How to take life from that dead-liuing swaine,
From th'earth, and from her wombe new spirits to reprize.
attendant, serf (of the hags); lover (of the lame hag)
He then remembred well, that had bene sayd,
She eke so often, as his life decayd,
And raysd him vp much stronger then before,
Therefore to ground he would him cast no more,
But beare him farre from hope of succour vsuall.
Hercules.  Antaeus was a huge giant, the son of Neptune and
Earth, and was invincible as long as he remained in contact with
his mother element.  In order to crush and kill him, Hercules had
to lift him into the air first)
Tho vp he caught him twixt his puissant hands,
The lothfull life, now loosd from sinfull bands,
Aboue three furlongs, taking his full course,
Him thereinto he threw without remorse,
So end of that Carles dayes, and his owne paines did make.
Which when those wicked Hags from farre did spy,
And th'one of them with dreadfull yelling cry,
And hauing quencht her burning fier brands,
But _Impotence_ with her owne wilfull hands,
So riu'd her trembling hart, and wicked end did make.
Arthur bound, or tried to bind, at 211.28:6)
Thus now alone he conquerour remaines;
Thought to haue mounted, but his feeble vaines
Through losse of bloud, which from his wounds did bleed,
But his good Squire him helping vp with speed,
And led him to the Castle by the beaten way.
Where many Groomes and Squiers readie were,
And eke the fairest _Alma_ met him there
To comfort him in his infirmity;
And of his armes despoyled easily,
And all the while his wounds were dressing, by him stayd.
_Guyon +by+ Palmers gouernance,
Doth ouerthrow the Bowre of blisse,
commas in this line alter the meaning, applying the palmer's
governance either to the sea-passage through "perils great" or to
the overthrow of the Bower of Bliss.  The original pointing
suggests that the palmer's governance applies to both)
personified by_ Acrasia
NOw gins this goodly frame of Temperance
To pricke of highest praise forth to aduance,
On firme foundation of true bountihed;
Now comes to point of that same perilous sted,
Mongst thousand dangers, and ten thousand magick mights.
does not give line-numbers_
Two dayes now in that sea he sayled has,
Ne ought saue perill, still as he did pas:
Vpon the waues to spred her trembling light,
That all their senses filled with affright,
Vp to the skyes, that them of drowning made affeard.
Said then the Boteman, Palmer stere aright,
We needes must passe (God do vs well acquight,)
That deepe engorgeth all this worldes pray:
He soone in vomit vp againe doth lay,
That all the seas for feare do seeme away to fly.
On th'other side an hideous Rocke is pight,
Depending from on high, dreadfull to sight,
And threatneth downe to throw his ragged rift
All passengers, that none from it can shift:
They on this rock are rent, and sunck in helplesse wawes.
in Thessaly)
ironwork)
Forward they passe, and strongly he them rowes,
Where streame more violent and greedy growes:
To strike his oares, and mightily doth driue
Which gaping wide, to swallow them aliue,
Doth rore at them in vaine, and with great terror raue.
They passing by, that griesly mouth did see,
That seem'd more horrible then hell to bee,
Through which the damned ghosts doen often creepe
But nought that falles into this direfull deepe,
May backe returne, but is condemned to be drent.
Naples; near it was the cave of the Cumaean Sibyl, through which
Aeneas descended to the infernal regions)
the lowest part of these; hell)
On th'other side, they saw that perilous Rocke,
On whose sharpe clifts the ribs of vessels broke,
Yet stuck, with carkasses exanimate
In wanton ioyes, and lustes intemperate,
Both of their life, and fame for euer fowly blent.
the hull}
For thy, this hight _The Rocke of_ vile _Reproch_,
To which nor fish nor fowle did once approch,
And Cormoyrants, with birds of rauenous race,
For spoyle of wretches, whose vnhappie cace,
At last them driuen hath to this despairefull drift.
gull, _Larus argentatus_, great black-backed gull, _L. marinus_,
etc., which have deeper cries)
their voices)
greed)
punningly: raven-like}
The Palmer seeing them in safetie past,
Of lustfull luxurie and thriftlesse wast:
Which spent their looser daies in lewd delights,
By these rent reliques, speaking their ill plights?
To shunne _Rocke of Reproch_, and it as death to dred.
So forth they rowed, and that _Ferryman_
That the hoare waters from his frigot ran,
Whiles the salt brine out of the billowes sprong.
On euery side floting the floods emong:
Therefore old Syre thy course do thereunto apply.
That may not be, said then the _Ferryman_
For those same Islands, seeming now and than,
But straggling plots, which to and fro do ronne
The _wandring Islands_.  Therefore doe them shonne;
Into most deadly daunger and distressed plight.
Yet well they seeme to him, that farre doth vew,
With grassie greene of delectable hew,
Are deckt with blossomes dyde in white and red,
But whosoeuer once hath fastened
But wandreth euer more vncertein and vnsure.
As th'Isle of _Delos_ whylome men report
Ne made for shipping any certaine port,
Flying from _Iunoes_ wrath and hard assay,
Which afterwards did rule the night and day;
And for _Apolloes_ +honor+ highly herried.
Jupiter chained it to the sea-bed so that Latona, pregnant with
Apollo and Diana, might have a secure resting-place for the
birth: see _Met._ 6.157-381)
persecuted by Juno)
sun)
They to him hearken, as beseemeth meete,
That one of those same Islands, which doe fleet
Which seemd so sweet and pleasant to the eye,
Vpon the banck they sitting did espy
By whom a litle skippet floting did appeare.
She them espying, loud to them +can+ call,
For she had cause to busie them withall;
Would they once turne, but kept on as afore:
And running to her boat withouten ore,
And after them did driue with all her power and might.
Whom ouertaking, she in merry sort
Now faining dalliance and wanton sport,
Till that the Palmer gan full bitterly
Which not abiding, but more scornefully
She turnd her bote about, and from them rowed quite.
That was the wanton _Ph{oe}dria_, which late
Whom nought regarding, they kept on their gate,
When them the wary Boateman thus bespake;
And of our safetie good heede to take;
Where many Mermayds haunt, making false melodies.
course
But by the way, there is a great Quicksand,
Therefore, Sir Palmer, keepe an euen hand;
Scarse had he said, when hard at hand they spy
But by the checked waue they did descry
It called was the quicksand of _Vnthriftyhed_.
shallowness of the water)
They passing by, a goodly Ship did see,
And brauely furnished, as ship might bee,
Her selfe had runne into that hazardize;
Labour'd in vaine, to haue recur'd their prize,
But neither toyle nor trauell might her backe recoyle.
quicksand}
On th'other side they see that perilous Poole,
In which full many had with haplesse doole
Whose circled waters rapt with whirling sway,
Did couet, as they passed by that way,
Of his wide _Labyrinth_, and then to haue them dround.
But th'+heedfull+ Boateman strongly forth did stretch
That th'vtmost sandy breach they shortly fetch,
Suddeine they see from midst of all the Maine,
And the great sea puft vp with proud disdaine,
As threatning to deuoure all, that his powre despise.
Hamilton (1980) surmises that the "sandy breach" might be the
extreme edge of the quicksand, the channel between it and the
whirlpool)
The waues come rolling, and the billowes rore
Or wrathfull _Neptune_ did them driue before
For not one puffe of wind there did appeare,
Vnweeting, what such horrour straunge did reare.
Of huge Sea monsters, such as liuing sence dismayd.
Most vgly shapes, and horrible aspects,
Or shame, that euer should so fowle defects
All dreadfull pourtraicts of deformitee:
Great whirlpooles, which all fishes make to flee,
Mighty +_Monoceros_+, with immeasured tayles.
immeasored _with the four-syllabled _treasores_ in "The Visions
of Petrarch" 2:6.  See also 212.33:4_
blue whale: "The Whales and Whirlepooles called Balaenae"
(Holland's Pliny, quoted in _OED_)}
fish-like creature having a single horn}
The dreadfull Fish, that hath deseru'd the name
The griesly Wasserman, that makes his game
The horrible Sea-satyre, that doth shew
Huge _Ziffius_, whom Mariners eschew
And greedy _Rosmarines_ with visages deforme.
not from the Latin _mors_ (death), as the bestiarists believed)
monster of the land was believed to have its counterpart in the
sea)
horse"}
All these, and thousand thousands many more,
With dreadfull noise, and hollow rombling rore,
Which seem'd to fly for feare, them to behold:
For all that here on earth we dreadfull hold,
Compared to the creatures in the seas entrall.
Feare nought, (then said the Palmer well auiz'd;)
But are into these fearefull shapes disguiz'd
And draw from on this iourney to proceede.
He smote the sea, which calmed was with speed,
Into great _Tethys_ bosome, where they hidden lye.
Quit from that daunger, forth their course they kept,
Of one, that wayld and +pittifully+ wept,
At last they in an Island did espy
That with great sorrow and sad agony,
And lowd to them for succour called euermore.
Which _Guyon_ hearing, streight his Palmer bad,
That he might know, and ease her sorrow sad:
Faire Sir, be not displeasd, if disobayd:
For she is inly nothing ill apayd,
Your stubborne hart t'affect with fraile infirmity.
To which when she your courage hath inclind
She will embosome deeper in your mind,
The knight was ruled, and the Boateman strayt
Ne euer shruncke, ne euer sought to bayt
But with his oares did sweepe the watry wildernesse.
to the boatman)
And now they nigh approched to the sted,
And calmy bay, on th'one side sheltered
On th'other side an high rocke toured still,
And did like an halfe Theatre fulfill:
And vsd to +bath+ themselues in that +deceiptfull+ shade.
They were faire Ladies, till they fondly striu'd
Of whom they ouer-comen, were depriu'd
Transform'd to fish, for their bold surquedry,
And their sweet skill in wonted melody;
T'allure weake trauellers, whom gotten they did kill.
notes at 212.52:8)
So now to _Guyon_, as he passed by,
O thou faire sonne of gentle Faery,
Aboue all knights, that euer battell tride,
Here may thy storme-bet vessell safely ride;
The worlds sweet In, from paine and wearisome turmoyle.
With that the rolling sea resounding soft,
And on the rocke the waues breaking aloft,
The whiles sweet _Zephirus_ lowd whisteled
Which _Guyons_ senses softly tickeled,
And let him heare some part of their rare melody.
Zephyr)
But him +the+ Palmer from that vanity,
That they it past, and shortly gan descry
When suddeinly a grosse fog ouer spred
And heauens chearefull face enueloped,
And this great Vniuerse seemd one confusd mas.
Thereat they greatly were dismayd, ne wist
But feard to wander in that wastfull mist,
Worse is the daunger hidden, then descride.
Of harmefull fowles about them fluttering, cride,
And sore annoyed, groping in that griesly night.
who might be able to rescue them; "mischief" = misfortune,
disaster, evil)
Euen all the nation of vnfortunate
Such as by nature men abhorre and hate,
The hoars Night-rauen, trump of dolefull drere,
The ruefull Strich, still waiting on the bere,
The hellish Harpies, prophets of sad destiny.
or the night-heron.  See _SC_, "June", 23 and gloss)
identified as either the tawny owl, _Strix aluco_, or the barn
owl, _Tyto alba_)
consisting nominally of seven notes, was said to portend the
hearer's death)
with greed.  See 207.23:7, _Aen._ 3.219 ff.)
to Aeneas at _Aen._ 3.225-62)
All those, and all that else does horrour breed,
Yet stayd they not, but forward did proceed,
Till that at last the weather gan to cleare,
Said then the Palmer, Lo where does appeare
Therefore, Sir knight, your ready armes about you throw.
He hearkned, and his armes about him tooke,
That with her crooked keele the land she strooke,
And his sage Palmer, that him gouerned;
They marched fairly forth, of nought ydred,
With constancy and care, gainst daunger and dismay.
Ere long they heard an hideous bellowing
As if that hungers point, or _Venus_ sting
Yet nought they feard, but past on hardily,
Who all attonce, gaping full greedily,
Ran towards, to deuoure those vnexpected guests.
But soone as they +approcht+ with deadly +threat,+
His mighty staffe, that could all charmes defeat:
And high aduaunced crests downe meekely feld,
And trembled, as them passing they beheld:
All monsters to subdew to him, that did it beare.
Of that same wood it fram'd was cunningly,
_Caduceus_ the rod of _Mercury_,
Through ghastly horrour, and eternall shade;
And _Orcus_ tame, whom nothing can perswade,
Such vertue in his staffe had eke this Palmer sage.
envoy of the gods; employed by them to conduct the souls of the
dead from the upper into the lower world.  According to Virgil,
his wand also allows him to summon these souls back from hell.
Mercury is identified as the god of reason and wisdom)
infernal}
Thence passing forth, they shortly do arriue,
A place pickt out by choice of best aliue,
In which what euer in this worldly state
Or that may +dayntiest+ fantasie aggrate,
And made there to abound with lauish affluence.
Goodly it was enclosed round about,
As those vnruly beasts to hold without;
Nought feard +their+ force, that fortilage to win,
By which the +mightiest+ things efforced bin:
Rather for pleasure, then for battery or fight.
otherwise_ feard _means "frightened" and_ their _refers to_ those
vnruly beasts
ram}
Yt framed was of precious yuory,
And therein all the famous history
Her mighty charmes, her furious louing fit,
His falsed faith, and loue too lightly flit,
First through the _Euxine_ seas bore all the flowr of _Greece_.
Colchis, and possessed magic powers.  When Jason, in the _Argo_,
came to Colchis in quest of the golden fleece, Medea fell in love
with him, helped him take it, and fled, pursued by her father.
To delay her father and prevent him from overtaking the _Argo_,
she murdered her young brother and strewed pieces of his body in
the sea; these Ae{e"}tes stopped to gather.  Medea was later
abandoned by Jason for Cre{u"}sa, daughter of King Creon of Corinth.
Medea took revenge by sending the new wife an enchanted robe,
which burnt her to death when she put it on)
Mars at Colchis, in Asia Minor, and guarded day and night by a
dragon.  Jason was persuaded to go on this quest by Pelias, king
of Iolcus in Thessaly)
named after its builder, Argus)
greatest heroes of Greece: Hercules, Theseus, Castor and Pollux,
etc.)
Ye might haue seene the frothy billowes fry
That seemd the waues were into yuory,
And other where the snowy substaunce sprent
A piteous spectacle did represent,
Yt seemd th'enchaunted flame, which did _Cre{u"}sa_ wed.
pitching deeply with head or stern in the trough of a wave)
also suggests: "And otherwhiles, with gold besprinkled, It seemed
the enchanted flame ...")
All this, and more might in that goodly gate
Which thither came: but in the Porch there sate
And semblaunce pleasing, more then naturall,
His looser garment to the ground did fall,
Not fit for speedy pace, or manly exercize.
They in that place him _Genius_ did call:
Of life, and generation of all
Who wondrous things concerning our welfare,
And oft of secret ill bids vs beware:
Yet each doth in him selfe it well perceiue to bee.
assigned to him at the moment of his birth; the demon accompanied
him throughout his life and after death conducted his soul to
Hades.  The Romans held a similar belief: the genius (the name
shares the same root as "geno", "gigno", to beget or bring forth)
was worshipped as the god of generation.  Each place also had its
own genius or guardian spirit.  Spenser is saying that the porter
here is _not_ that celestial power, and I have shown the
parenthesis recommended by Warton (1762))
Therefore a God him sage Antiquity
But this same was to that quite contrary,
That secretly doth vs procure to fall,
He of this Gardin had the gouernall,
Holding a staffe in hand for more formalitee.
records
contrived, feigned; bequeathed
With diuerse flowres he daintily was deckt,
A mighty Mazer bowle of wine was set,
Wherewith all new-come guests he gratifide:
But he his idle curtesie defide,
And broke his staffe, with which he charmed semblants sly.
cups}
Thus being entred, they behold around
Strowed with pleasauns, whose faire grassy ground
With all the ornaments of _Floraes_ pride,
Of niggard Nature, like a pompous bride
When forth from virgin bowre she comes in th'early morne.
display)
+Thereto+ the Heauens alwayes Iouiall,
Ne suffred storme nor frost on them to fall,
Nor scorching heat, nor cold intemperate
But the milde aire with season moderate
That still it breathed forth sweet spirit and holesome smell.
joyful, happy}
More sweet and holesome, then the pleasaunt hill
A gyaunt babe, her selfe for griefe did kill;
Faire _Daphne Ph{oe}bus_ hart with loue did gore;
When euer they their heauenly bowres forlore;
+Or _Eden_ selfe, if ought+ with _Eden_ mote compaire.
that ought _1609_
Bacchus and named after the nymph Rhodope, who bore Neptune a
giant child (_Met._ 10.86 ff.).  In _Met._ 6.87-9 Jupiter turns
Rhodope into a mountain as punishment for her excessive pride)
Mt Olympus; through it the River Peneus flows into the sea.  One
of the favourite haunts of Apollo)
was on the point of being overtaken when she prayed for release
and was metamorphosed into a laurel-tree.  See _Met._ 1.452-567)
and the judgement of Paris (see note at 207.55:5).  In Homer, the
summit of Ida is the vantage of the gods when they watch the
battles in the plain of Troy)
celebrated as one of the chief haunts of Apollo and the Muses;
"sweet" because it was so well wooded)
name Musagetes as a result.  See e.g. _Myth._ 4.10)
Much wondred _Guyon_ at the faire aspect
To sincke into his sence, nor mind affect,
Bridling his will, and maistering his might:
No gate, but like one, being goodly dight
Their clasping armes, in wanton wreathings intricate.
So fashioned a Porch with rare deuice,
Whose bounches hanging downe, seemed to entice
And did themselues into their hands incline,
Some deepe empurpled as the +_Hyacint_+,
Some like faire Emeraudes, not yet well ripened.
of the italicization of the original, also making reference to
the lily, described by Ovid as deep red or purple, which sprang
from the blood of the beautiful youth Hyacinth.  Hyacinth
received the amorous attentions of Apollo and Zephyr (god of the
west wind), but Zephyr's interest was not reciprocated.  One day,
when Apollo and Hyacinth were playing at quoits, the jealous
Zephyr caused one of Apollo's quoits to drift in flight and
strike Hyacinth on the head, killing him instantly.  See
_Met._ 10.162-219)
And them amongst, some were of burnisht gold,
Which did themselues emongst the leaues enfold,
That the weake bowes, with so rich load opprest,
Vnder that Porch a comely dame did rest,
And garments loose, that seemd vnmeet for womanhed.
In her left hand a Cup of gold she held,
Whose sappy liquor, that with fulnesse sweld,
Of her fine fingers, without fowle empeach,
Thereof she vsd to giue to drinke to each,
It was her guise, all Straungers goodly so to greet.
So she to _Guyon_ offred it to tast;
The cup to ground did violently cast,
And with the liquor stained all the lond:
Yet no'te the same amend, ne yet withstond,
Who +not+ regarding her displeasure forward goth.
There the most daintie Paradise on ground,
In which all pleasures plenteously abound,
The painted flowres, the trees vpshooting hye,
The trembling groues, the Christall running by;
The art, which all that wrought, appeared in no place.
One would haue thought, (so cunningly, the rude,
That nature had for wantonesse ensude
So striuing each th'other to vndermine,
So diff'ring both in willes, agreed in fine:
This Gardin to adorne with all varietie.
And in the midst of all, a fountaine stood,
So pure and shiny, that the siluer flood
Most goodly it with +curious+ imageree
Of which some seemd with liuely iollitee,
Whilest others did them selues embay in liquid ioyes.
And ouer all, of purest gold was spred,
For the rich mettall was so coloured,
Would surely deeme it to be yuie trew:
That themselues dipping in the siluer dew,
Which drops of Christall seemd for wantones to weepe.
people
Infinit streames continually did well
The which into an ample lauer fell,
That like a little lake it seemd to bee;
That through the waues one might the bottom see,
That seemd the fountaine in that sea did sayle vpright.
to 1.7 metres); the cubit is an ancient measure based on the
length of the forearm, about 18-22 inches)
green colour)
And all the margent round about was set,
The sunny beames, which on the billowes bet,
As _Guyon_ hapned by the same to wend,
Which therein bathing, seemed to contend,
Their dainty parts from vew of any, which them eyde.
Sometimes the one would lift the other quight
Her plong, as ouer maistered by might,
And each the other from to rise restraine;
So through the Christall waues appeared plaine:
And th'amarous sweet spoiles to greedy eyes reuele.
As that faire Starre, the messenger of morne,
Or as the _Cyprian_ goddesse, newly borne
Such seemed they, and so their yellow heare
Whom such when _Guyon_ saw, he drew him neare,
His stubborne brest gan secret pleasaunce to embrace.
of love)
of the worship of Aphrodite (Venus); she is also called Cypria.
Thus "cyprian" also = "lewd", "licentious")
the sea-foam: hence her name, from the Greek _aphros_, foam,
froth)
The wanton Maidens him espying, stood
Then th'one her selfe low ducked in the flood,
But th'other rather higher did arise,
And all, that might his melting hart entise
The rest hid vnderneath, him more desirous made.
With that, the other likewise vp arose,
Vp in one knot, she low adowne did lose:
And th'yuorie in golden mantle gownd:
Yet that, which reft it, no lesse faire was fownd:
Nought but her louely face she for his looking left.
Withall she laughed, and she blusht withall,
And laughter to her blushing, as did fall:
Them to behold, and in his sparkling face
Their wanton meriments they did encreace,
And shewd him many sights, that courage cold could reare.
On which when gazing him the Palmer saw,
And counseld well, him forward thence did draw.
Of her fond fauorites so nam'd amis:
For here the end of all our trauell is:
Else she will slip away, and all our drift despise.
Eftsoones they heard a most melodious sound,
Such as attonce might not on liuing ground,
Right hard it was, for wight, which did it heare,
For all that pleasing is to liuing eare,
Birdes, voyces, instruments, windes, waters, all agree.
The ioyous birdes shrouded in chearefull shade,
Th'Angelicall soft trembling voyces made
The siluer sounding instruments did meet
The waters fall with difference discreet,
The gentle warbling wind low answered to all.
There, whence that Musick seemed heard to bee,
With a new Louer, whom through sorceree
There she had him now layd a slombering,
Whilst round about them pleasauntly did sing
That euer mixt their song with light licentious toyes.
And all +that+ while, right ouer him she hong,
As seeking medicine, whence she was stong,
And oft inclining downe with kisses light,
And through his humid eyes did sucke his spright,
Wherewith she sighed soft, as if his case she rewd.
their pupils dilated with belladonna)
more of the same)
"grazing", "stripping a pasture", becomes relevant when we learn
that her lover's name is Verdant: see 212.82:8)
The whiles some one did chaunt this louely lay;
In springing flowre the image of thy day;
Doth first peepe forth with bashfull modestee,
Lo see soone after, how more bold and free
Loe see soone after, how she fades, and falles away.
So passeth, in the passing of a day,
Ne more doth flourish after first decay,
Of many a Ladie, and many a Paramowre:
For soone comes age, that will her pride deflowre:
Whilest louing thou mayst loued be with equall crime.
meaning "impartial"; and "crime" can mean "accusation".  If these
are adopted, the phrase might mean "without unfair judgement", or
something similar.  Hamilton (1980) cites Cheney (1966), and
suggests that the phrase "conveys the sense less of `mutual
enjoyment (and hence no crime at all)' than that of `a reprobate
guilt to be shared by all'")
He ceast, and then gan all the quire of birdes
As in approuance of his pleasing words.
Yet swarued not, but kept their forward way,
In which they creeping did at last display
Whose sleepie head she in her lap did soft dispose.
branches)
Vpon a bed of Roses she was layd,
And was arayd, or rather disarayd,
That hid no whit her alablaster skin,
More subtile web _Arachne_ can not spin,
Of scorched deaw, do not in th'aire more lightly flee.
Her snowy brest was bare to readie spoyle
And yet through languour of her late sweet toyle,
That like pure Orient perles adowne it trild,
Moystened their fierie beames, with which she thrild
Which sparckling on the silent waues, does seeme more bright.
lustre; brilliant, lustrous, sparkling}
(last is SUS)}
The young man sleeping by her, seemd to bee
That certes it great pittie was to see
A sweet regard, and amiable grace,
Yet sleeping, in his well proportiond face,
Did now but freshly spring, and silken blossomes beare.
His warlike armes, the idle instruments
And his braue shield, full of old moniments,
Ne for them, ne for honour cared hee,
But in lewd loues, and wastfull luxuree,
O horrible enchantment, that him so did blend.
and other marks of battle)}
enjoyment}
spoil
The noble Elfe, and carefull Palmer drew
That suddein forth they on them rusht, and threw
The skilfull Palmer formally did frame.
Fled all away for feare of fowler shame.
Tryde all her arts, and all her sleights, thence out to wrest.
lover, Mars, at _Met._ 4.169 ff.)
Appendix at 212.1:4)
And eke her louer stroue: but all in vaine;
That neither guile, nor force might it distraine.
In captiue bandes, which there they readie found:
For nothing else might keepe her safe and sound;
And counsell sage in steed thereof to him applyde.
steel, from Greek _adamas_); also: a very hard rock of legendary
hardness, as diamond or sapphire}
But all those pleasant bowres and Pallace braue,
Ne ought their goodly workmanship might saue
But that their blisse he turn'd to balefulnesse:
Their arbers +spoyle+, their Cabinets suppresse,
And of the fairest late, now made the fowlest place.
Then led they her away, and eke that knight
The way they came, the same retourn'd they right,
Charm'd those wild-beasts, that rag'd with furie mad.
As in their mistresse reskew, whom they lad;
Then _Guyon_ askt, what meant those beastes, which there did ly.
Said he, +these+ seeming beasts are men indeed,
Whylome her louers, which her lusts did feed,
According to their mindes like monstruous.
And mournefull meed of ioyes delicious:
Let them returned be vnto their former state.
Streight way he with his vertuous staffe them strooke,
Yet being men they did vnmanly looke,
And some for wrath, to see their captiue Dame:
That had an hog beene late, hight _Grille_ by name,
That had from hoggish forme him brought to naturall.
terrified by the supernatural}
_Whether the Beasts have the Use of Reason_)
Said _Guyon_, See the mind of beastly man,
Of his creation, when he life began,
To be a beast, and lacke intelligence.
Delights in filth and foule incontinence:
But let vs hence depart, whilest wether serues and wind.
_Of Chastitie_.
IT falles me here to write of Chastity,
For which what needs me fetch from _Faery_
Sith it is shrined in my Soueraines brest,
That to all Ladies, which haue it profest,
If pourtrayd it might be by any liuing art.
"Need but to behold ..."  Alternatively the "Ladies" may share
with "pourtraict" the verb "pourtrayd")
But liuing art may not least part expresse,
All were it _Zeuxis_ or _Praxiteles_:
And her perfections with his error taint:
In picturing the parts of beautie daint,
For fear through want of words her excellence to marre.
Artist, of Knossos)
How then shall I, Apprentice of the skill,
Presume so high to stretch mine humble quill?
Hereto perforce.  But {o^} dred Soueraine
Cannot your glorious pourtraict figure plaine
And antique praises vnto present persons fit.
But if in liuing colours, and right hew,
Who can it doe more liuely, or more trew,
In which a gracious seruant pictured
That with his melting sweetnesse rauished,
My senses lulled are in slomber of delight.
explorer, scholar, statesman, and a favourite of Queen Elizabeth.
He had a huge estate near Spenser's in southern Ireland, and
under his auspices the _FQ_ was published and dedicated to the
sovereign)
_The Ocean's Love to Cynthia_; of this, only one book has
survived.  See I:118-24)
But let that same delitious Poet lend
To sing his mistresse prayse, and let him mend,
Ne let his fairest _Cynthia_ refuse,
But either _Gloriana_ let her chuse,
In th'one her rule, in th'other her rare chastitee.
paragon of beauty
_Guyon encountreth Britomart,
Duessaes traines and +Malecastaes+
Virgil (_Ciris_, 295 ff.), who is associated with Diana; the name
also appropriately suggests "Briton" conjoined with "Martial")
be said that some of her "traines" are employed by Malecasta)
her lascivious glances.  She is also called the Lady of Delight)
THe famous Briton Prince and Faerie knight,
Hauing their wearie limbes to perfect plight
Of the faire _Alma_ greatly were procured,
But when thereto they might not be allured,
They courteous conge tooke, and forth together yode.
But the captiu'd _Acrasia_ he sent,
With a strong gard, all reskew to preuent,
That her for witnesse of his hard assay,
But he himselfe betooke another way,
And seeke aduentures, as he with Prince _Arthur_ went.
Long so they trauelled through wastefull wayes,
To hunt for glorie and renowmed praise;
From the vprising to the setting Sunne,
Of all the which they honour euer wonne,
And to recouer right for such, as wrong did grieue.
At last as through an open plaine they yode,
And him beside an aged Squire there rode,
As if that age bad him that burden spare,
He them espying, gan himselfe prepare,
That bore a Lion passant in a golden field.
towards the right, with the right fore-paw raised)
heraldic arms described are those of Brutus, first of the kings
in the chronicle of 210 and an ancestor of Britomart)
Which seeing good Sir _Guyon_, deare besought
He graunted: then the Faery quickly raught
His fomy steed, whose fierie feete did burne
Ne did the other backe his foot returne,
And bent his dreadfull speare against the others head.
would converge on horseback, lances advanced, and, having passed
one another, turn at the end of the course to repeat the action)
They bene ymet, and both their points arriued,
That seem'd both shield and plate it would haue riued;
But made him stagger, as he were not well:
Nigh a speares length behind his crouper fell,
That mischieuous mischance his life and limbes did spare.
under the horse's tail; the horse's rump}
Great shame and sorrow of that fall he tooke;
And shiuering speare in bloudie field first shooke,
Ah gentlest knight, that euer armour bore,
And brought to ground, that neuer wast before;
That speare enchaunted was, which layd thee on the greene.
But weenedst thou what wight thee ouerthrew,
For thy hard fortune then thou wouldst renew,
On equall plaine, and there so hard beset;
Whom straunge aduenture did from _Britaine_ fet,
Whose image she had seene in _Venus_ looking glas.
Full of disdainefull wrath, he fierce vprose,
And snatching his bright sword began to close
Die rather would he, then endure that same.
His toward perill and vntoward blame,
For death sate on the point of that enchaunted speare.
And hasting towards him gan faire perswade,
His speares default to mend with cruell blade;
The secret vertue of that weapon keene,
Nothing on earth mote alwaies happie beene.
To loose long gotten honour with one euill hond.
By such good meanes he him discounselled,
And eke the Prince like treaty handeled,
And laid the blame, not to his carriage,
And to the ill purueyance of his page,
So is his angry courage fairely pacifyde.
saddle and bridle.  Cf. I:175)
Thus reconcilement was betweene them knit,
And either vowd with all their power and wit,
Of friend or foe, who euer it embaste,
In which accord the Prince was also plaste,
So goodly all agreed, they forth yfere did ryde.
O goodly vsage of those antique times,
When not for malice and contentious crimes,
The martiall brood accustomed to fight:
And yet the vanquished had no despight:
Vile rancour to auoid, and cruell surquedrie.
malevolence), _hence:_ emulate
Long they thus trauelled in friendly wise,
Seeking aduentures hard, to exercise
At length they came into a forrest wyde,
Full griesly seem'd: Therein they long did ryde,
Saue Beares, Lions, and Buls, which romed them around.
"dernly" is SUS)
All suddenly out of the thickest brush,
A goodly Ladie did foreby them rush,
And eke through feare as white as whales bone:
And all her steed with tinsell trappings shone,
And scarse them leasure gaue, her passing to behold.
thread}
Still as she fled, her eye she backward threw,
And her faire yellow locks behind her flew,
All as a blazing starre doth farre outcast
At sight whereof the people stand aghast:
That it importunes death and dolefull drerihed.
So as they gazed after her a while,
Breathing out beastly lust her to defile:
Through thicke and thin, both ouer banke and bush
That from his gorie sides the bloud did gush:
And in his clownish hand a sharp bore speare he shooke.
Which outrage when those gentle knights did see,
They stayd not to auise, who first should bee,
To reskew her from shamefull villany.
Her selfe pursewd, in hope to win thereby
But after the foule foster _Timias_ did striue.
last)
The whiles faire _Britomart_, whose constant mind,
Ne reckt of Ladies Loue, did stay behind,
To weet if they would turne backe to that place:
As lay her iourney, through that perlous Pace,
Ne euill thing she fear'd, ne euill thing she ment.
passage}
particularly:_ united with, _hence:_ allowed to attach itself to
her
At last as nigh out of the wood she came,
To which her steps directly she did frame.
And plaste for pleasure nigh that forrest syde:
Mantled with greene, it selfe did spredden wyde,
Fierce battell against one, with cruell might and maine.
Mainly they all attonce vpon him laid,
That nigh he breathlesse grew, yet nought dismaid,
All had he lost much bloud through many a wound,
To which he turned in his wrathfull stound,
That none of all the sixe before, him durst assay.
usage):_ roaring, violent noise; _so:_ uproar
Like dastard Curres, that hauing at a bay
Dare not aduenture on the stubborne pray,
To get a snatch, when turned is his face.
When _Britomart_ him saw, she ran a pace
Bad those same sixe forbeare that single enimy.
But to her cry they list not lenden eare,
But gathering him round about more neare,
Till that she rushing through the thickest preasse,
And soone compeld to hearken vnto peace:
The cause of their dissention and outrageous yre.
Whereto that single knight did answere frame;
To chaunge my liefe, and loue another Dame,
So vnto wrong to yield my wrested right:
Ne list me chaunge; she th'_Errant Damzell_ hight,
I haue endur'd, and tasted many a bloudy wound.
always easy)
Certes (said she) then bene ye sixe to blame,
For knight to leaue his Ladie were great shame,
All losse is lesse, and lesse the infamie,
Ne may loue be compeld by maisterie;
Taketh his nimble wings, and soone away is gone.
Then spake one of those sixe, There dwelleth here
Whose soueraine beautie hath no liuing pere,
That neuer any mote with her compaire.
That euery knight, which doth this way repaire,
Shall doe vnto her seruice neuer to remoue.
professed love}
But if he haue a Ladie or a Loue,
Or else with vs by dint of sword approue,
As did this knight, before ye hither came.
But what reward had he, that ouercame?
(Said they) and haue our Ladies loue for his reward.
Therefore a read Sir, if thou haue a loue.
Yet will I not fro mine owne loue remoue,
But wreake your wrongs wrought to this knight alone,
She mightily auentred towards one,
Then to the next she rode, and downe the next did beare.
occurs at 403.9:1 and 406.11:3)
Ne did she stay, till three on ground she layd,
The fourth was by that other knight dismayd,
That now there do but two of six remaine;
Ah (said she then) now may ye all see plaine,
That for his trusty seruaunts doth so strongly fight.
Too well we see, (said they) and proue too well
For thy faire Sir, yours be the Damozell,
And we your liege men faith vnto you plight.
And after her besought, well as they might,
She graunted, and then in they all together far'd.
"swords" is taken literally); _or:_ disgraced, debased (if
"swords" is taken to mean their collective valour, which is
debased by the act of laying their weapons at the victor's feet
- particularly as they later break their word.  In either case
the use is forced)
Long were it to describe the goodly frame,
(For so that Castle hight by commune name)
And comely glee of many gracious
Who through a Chamber long and spacious,
That of them cleeped was the _Lady of delight_.
inhabitants)
But for to tell the sumptuous aray
For liuing wit, I weene, cannot display
Of euery pillour and of euery post;
And with great pearles and pretious stones embost,
Did sparckle forth great light, and glorious did appeare.
These straunger knights through passing, forth were led
And rich purueyance might vneath be red;
Which stately manner when as they did see,
Exceeding much the state of meane degree,
Might be maintaynd, and each gan diuersely deuize.
victuals
The wals were round about apparelled
In which with cunning hand was pourtrahed
The faire _Adonis_, turned to a flowre,
First did it shew the bitter balefull stowre,
When first her tender hart was with his beautie smit.
tapestries, which were often made in the form of wall-hangings)
tapestries)
boar and died.  The anemone sprang from his blood.  Venus's grief
was such that the gods of the lower world allowed him to spend
six months of each year with her on earth.  See _Met._
_Venus and Adonis_)
Then with what sleights and sweet allurements she
And wooed him her Paramoure to be;
To crowne his golden lockes with honour dew;
From his Beauperes, and from bright heauens vew,
Or bathe him in a fountaine by some couert glade.
And whilst he slept, she ouer him would spred
And her soft arme lay vnderneath his hed,
And whilest he bath'd, with her two crafty spyes,
And throw into the well sweet Rosemaryes,
And euer with sweet Nectar she did sprinkle him.
food of the gods.  See 306.18:9}
So did she steale his heedelesse hart away,
But for she saw him bent to cruell play,
Dreadfull of daunger, that mote him betyde,
From chase of greater beasts, whose brutish pryde
For who can shun the chaunce, that dest'ny doth ordaine?
_hence:_ strength
Lo, where beyond he lyeth languishing,
And by his side the Goddesse groueling
With her soft garment wipes away the gore,
But when she saw no helpe might him restore,
Which in that cloth was wrought, as if it liuely grew.
So was that chamber clad in goodly wize,
As whilome was the antique worldes guize,
As pleased them to vse, that vse it might:
Dauncing and reueling both day and night,
And _Cupid_ still emongst them kindled lustfull fires.
And all the while sweet Musicke did diuide
And all the while sweet birdes thereto applide
Ay caroling of loue and iollity,
Which when those knights beheld, with scornefull eye,
And loath'd the loose demeanure of that wanton sort.
soothing and effeminate; see Plato, _Republic_ 3.398)
Thence they were brought to that great Ladies vew,
That glistred all with gold and glorious shew,
She seemd a woman of great bountihed,
Her wanton eyes, ill signes of womanhed,
Without regard of grace, or comely amenaunce.
Long worke it were, and needlesse to deuize
She caused them be led in curteous wize
And cheared well with wine and spiceree:
But the braue Mayd would not disarmed bee,
And so did let her goodly visage to appere.
As when faire _Cynthia_, in darkesome night,
Where she may find the substaunce thin and light,
Discouers to the world discomfited;
With thousand blessings she is heried;
With which faire _Britomart_ gaue light vnto the day.
And eke those six, which lately with her fought,
Vnto her vew, and company vnsoght;
And all sixe brethren, borne of one parent,
And goodly taught to tilt and turnament;
And her knights seruice ought, to hold of her in fee.
"Malecasta's", lines 7-9 of the stanza contain _doubles
entendres_ on "tilt", "free", "seruice", "ought" (in the sense
"rendered"), and "hold of her")
with lances, who ride on opposite sides of a barrier and score by
attaints (touches, strikes, sometimes involving the loser being
unhorsed) and by lances broken}
groups of mounted knights fight with blunted weapons}
The first of them by name _Gardante_ hight,
The second was _Parlante_, a bold knight,
_Basciante_ did him selfe most curteous shew;
And yet in armes _Noctante_ greater grew:
But to faire _Britomart_ they all but shadowes beene.
called "a ladder of lechery" (Gilbert 1941, quoted by Roche
For she was full of amiable grace,
That as the one stird vp affections bace,
And hold them backe, that would in errour fall;
To which sharpe thornes and +breres+ the way forstall,
But wishing it far off, his idle wish doth lose.
Whom when the Lady saw so faire a +wight,+
(For she her weend a fresh and lusty knight)
And with vaine thoughts her falsed fancy vex:
Like sparkes of fire, +which+ fall in +sclender+ flex,
And ransackt all her veines with passion entire.
wicks were once made)
Eftsoones she grew to great impatience
That plaine discouered her incontinence,
For she was giuen all to fleshly lust,
That all regard of shame she had discust,
So shamelesse beauty soone becomes a +loathly+ +sight.+
supported by 301.50:6-8)
Faire Ladies, that to loue captiued arre,
Let not her fault your sweet affections marre,
'Mongst thousands good one wanton Dame to find:
For this was not to loue, but lust inclind;
And in each gentle hart desire of honour breeds.
Nought so of loue this looser Dame did skill,
Giuing the bridle to her wanton will,
Such loue is hate, and such desire is shame.
Of her false eyes, that at her hart did ayme,
But _Britomart_ dissembled it with ignoraunce.
Supper was shortly dight and downe they sat,
Whiles fruitfull _Ceres_, and _Ly{ae}us_ fat
Nought wanted there, that dainty was and rare;
And aye betweene the cups, she did prepare
But _Britomart_ would not such guilfull message know.
care; hence, here: wine)
recognize (but cf. 301.53:9)
So when they slaked had the feruent heat
The Lady did faire _Britomart_ entreat,
To loose her warlike limbs and strong effort,
(For she her sexe vnder that straunge purport
In plainer wise to tell her grieuaunce she begonne.
And all attonce discouered her desire
The outward sparkes of her in burning fire;
That but if she did lend her short reliefe,
But the chaste damzell, that had neuer priefe
Did easily beleeue her strong extremitie.
Full easie was for her to haue beliefe,
And by long triall of the inward griefe,
Could iudge what paines do louing harts perplexe.
And to faire semblaunce doth light faith annexe;
Into his hidden net full easily doth fall.
For thy she would not in discourteise wise,
For great rebuke it is, loue to despise,
But with faire countenaunce, as beseemed best,
Her loue too light, to wooe a wandring guest:
That from like inward fire that outward smoke had +steemd.+
Therewith a while she her flit fancy fed,
But yet her wound still inward freshly bled,
Did spred it selfe, and venime close inspire.
And euery knight, and euery gentle Squire
With whom he meant to make his sport and courtly play.
intercourse}
Some fell to daunce, some fell to hazardry,
As diuerse wits to diuers things apply;
Her crafty engins to her close intent.
Doth light the lower world, were half yspent,
Into the _Ocean_ deepe to driue their weary droue.
cluster or asterism marking the head of the constellation Taurus.
The most prominent of the Hyades is Aldebaran, the eye of the
bull.  At best, seven of the Hyades are visible to the naked eye.
In early legend they were said to be seven nymphs placed by
Jupiter in the sky.  Later (_Myth._ 4.7) they became daughters of
Atlas (a mythical giant said to support on his shoulders the
pillars of the universe), and their number increased to twelve or
fifteen.  The name is probably derived from the Greek verb _hyo_,
to rain; the V-shaped cluster of the Hyades, when rising
simultaneously with the sun, was said to portend wet weather:
hence the alternative name, and Spenser's epithet)
High time it seemed then for euery wight
Eftsoones long waxen torches weren light,
Tho when the Britonesse saw all the rest
And safe commit to her soft fethered nest,
She soundly slept, and carefull thoughts did quite assoile.
Now whenas all the world in silence deepe
Was drowned in the depth of deadly sleepe,
Could find no rest in such perplexed plight,
And vnder the blacke vele of guilty Night,
That was with gold and Ermines faire enueloped.
chastity, though "ermine" is also the name for the stoat, an
emblem of unchastity, in its winter pelage)
to the verb)
catachr.:_ lined (cf. 207.4:2)
Then panting soft, and trembling euery ioynt,
Where she for secret purpose did appoynt
And to her bed approching, first she prooued,
She softly felt, if any member mooued,
If any puffe of breath, or signe of sence she +fond+.
Which whenas none she fond, with easie shift,
Th'embroderd quilt she lightly vp did lift,
Of euery finest fingers touch affrayd;
But inly sigh'd.  At last the royall Mayd
And chaungd her weary side, the better ease to take.
Where feeling one close couched by her side,
And to her weapon ran, in minde to gride
Through suddein feare and ghastly drerihed,
And the whole family therewith adred,
And to the troubled chamber all in armes did throng.
supernatural)
And those six Knights that Ladies Champions,
Halfe armd and halfe vnarmd, with them attons:
Their Lady lying on the sencelesse grownd;
All in her snow-white smocke, with locks vnbownd,
That with so troublous terrour they were all dismayde.
forced by the rhyme:_ stand, place, spot
About their Lady first they flockt arownd,
Shortly they reard out of her frosen swownd;
To stirre vp strife, and troublous contecke broch:
None of them rashly durst to her approch,
Her succourd eke the Champion of the bloudy Crosse.
But one of those sixe knights, _Gardante_ hight,
Which forth he sent with felonous despight,
The mortall steele stayd not, till it was seene
But lightly rased her soft silken skin,
Which did her lilly smock with staines of vermeil steepe.
Wherewith enrag'd she fiercely at them flew,
That none of them foule mischiefe could eschew,
Here, there, and euery where about her swayd
And eke the _Redcrosse_ knight gaue her good aid,
That in short space their foes they haue quite terrifide.
Tho whenas all were put to shamefull flight,
And her bright armes about her body dight:
Where so loose life, and so vngentle trade
So earely ere the grosse Earthes gryesy shade,
They tooke their steeds, and forth vpon their iourney went.
_The Redcrosse knight to Britomart
The wondrous myrrhour, by which she
Geoffrey of Monmouth (_HRB_ 9.12).  Artgallo, son of Gorlois, was
the brother of Cador, king of Cornwall, and half-brother of
Arthur; in _FQ_ "Artegall" signifies "Equal to Arthur")
HEre haue I cause, in men iust blame to find,
And not indifferent to woman kind,
They do impart, ne maken memorie
Scarse do they spare to one or two or three,
Does all their deeds deface, and dims their glories +all.+
standard}
But by record of antique times I find,
And to all great exploits them selues inclind:
Till enuious Men fearing their rules decay,
Yet sith they warlike armes haue layd +away,+
That now we foolish men that prayse gin eke t'enuy.
Of warlike puissaunce in ages spent,
But of all wisedome be thou precedent,
Endite I would as dewtie doth excite;
When in so high an obiect they do lite,
Thy selfe thy prayses tell, and make them knowen farre.
precedent of ancient puissance and Elizabeth the precedent of all
wisdom)
_or:_ alight, _hence:_ find their place
She trauelling with +_Guyon_+ by the way,
T'abridg their iourney long, and lingring day;
To aske this Briton Mayd, what vncouth wind,
Made her dissemble her disguised kind:
But fairest knight aliue, when armed was her brest.
character is described at 302.4:4 as having a "Faeries mind"
seems to indicate that Spenser really does confuse here the
Redcross Knight with the hero of the book just finished.
However, it must be said that the Redcross Knight is loosely
identified as a Faery throughout Book I_
Thereat she sighing softly, had no powre
But with hart-thrilling throbs and bitter stowre,
And euery daintie limbe with horrour shake;
Flasht through her face, as it had beene a flake
At last the passion past she thus him answered.
Faire Sir, I let you weete, that from the howre
I haue beene trained vp in warlike stowre,
The warlike ryder to his most mishap;
As Ladies wont, in pleasures wanton lap,
Me leuer were with point of foemans speare be dead.
All my delight on deedes of armes is set,
By sea, by land, where so they may be met,
Without respect of richesse or reward.
Withouten compasse, or withouten card,
The greater _Britaine_, here to seeke for prayse and fame.
rather than the lesser Britain, Brittany, in France)
Fame blazed hath, that here in Faery lond
And many straunge aduentures to be fond,
Which +I to proue,+ this voyage haue begonne.
Tydings of one, that hath vnto me donne
The which I seeke to wreake, and _Arthegall_ he hight.
The word gone out, she backe againe would call,
But that he it vp-taking ere the fall,
Certes ye misauised beene, t'vpbrayd
For weet ye well of all, that euer playd
The noble _Arthegall_ hath euer borne the name.
before she believed it had registered with the Redcross Knight
and before she had had a chance to correct herself)
opposite sides of a barrier and score by attaints (touches,
strikes, sometimes involving the loser being unhorsed) and by
lances broken}
with blunted weapons}
For thy great wonder were it, if such shame
Or euer do, that mote deseruen blame:
That may vnworthy of it selfe be thought.
Least that too farre ye haue your sorrow sought:
And honour both; for each of other worthy are.
The royall Mayd woxe inly wondrous glad,
And ioyd that euer she affixed had,
How euer finely she it faind to hide:
In the deare closet of her painefull side,
Doth not so much reioyce, as she reioyced theare.
But to occasion him to further talke,
Her list in +strifull+ termes with him to balke,
Your curteous tongue, his prayses to compile,
Such as ye haue him boasted, to beguile
In shame of knighthood, as I largely can report.
Let be therefore my vengeaunce to disswade,
Ah, but if reason faire might you perswade,
(Said he) perhaps ye should it better find:
That man to hard conditions to bind,
Whose prowesse paragon saw neuer liuing wight.
relevant meaning for Britomart)
Ne soothlich is it easie for to read,
For he ne wonneth in one certaine stead,
Ay doing things, that to his fame redound,
Where so he heares, that any doth confound
So is his soueraine honour raisde to heauens hight.
His feeling words her feeble sence much pleased,
Hart that is inly hurt, is greatly eased
For pleasing words are like to Magick art,
Such secret ease felt gentle _Britomart_,
So dischord oft in Musick makes the sweeter lay.
cf. 106.4:9, etc.)
And said, Sir knight, these idle termes forbeare,
Tell me some markes, by which he may appeare,
For perdie one shall other slay, or daunt:
And what so else his person most may vaunt?
And him in euery +part+ before her fashioned.
II 4 b)
Yet him in euery part before she knew,
Sith him whilome in _Britaine_ she did vew,
Whereof did grow her first engraffed paine;
That but the fruit more sweetnesse did containe,
And yield the pray of loue to lothsome death at last.
By strange occasion she did him behold,
As it in bookes hath written bene of old.
What time king _Ryence_ raign'd, and dealed right,
By his deepe science, and hell-dreaded might,
Whose vertues through the wyde world soone were solemniz'd.
South Wales)
It vertue had, to shew in perfect sight,
Betwixt the lowest earth and heauens hight,
What euer foe had wrought, or frend had faynd,
Ne ought in secret from the same remaynd;
Like to the world it selfe, and seem'd a world of glas.
Who wonders not, that reades so wonderous worke?
Wherein th'{AE}gyptian _Phao_ long did lurke
Yet she might all men vew out of her bowre?
Ybuilded all of glasse, by Magicke powre,
Yet when his loue was false, he with a peaze it brake.
is not known)
of the museum and library of Alexandria; completed the Pharos,
the lighthouse which was one of the seven wonders of the ancient
world.  He was credited with almost magical powers in working
with glass)
supernatural powers:_ pease: pea
Such was the glassie globe that _Merlin_ made,
That neuer foes his kingdome might inuade,
Tydings thereof, and so them still debar'd.
And worthy worke of infinite reward,
Happie this Realme, had it remained euer since.
One day it fortuned, faire _Britomart_
For nothing he from her reseru'd apart,
Where when she had espyde that mirrhour fayre,
Tho her auizing of the vertues rare,
Her to bethinke of, that mote to her selfe pertaine.
But as it falleth, in the gentlest harts
And tyrannizeth in the bitter smarts
So thought this Mayd (as maydens vse to done)
Not that she lusted after any one;
Yet wist her life at last must lincke in that same knot.
Eftsoones there was presented to her eye
Through whose bright ventayle lifted vp on hye
And friends to termes of gentle truce entize,
Betwixt two shadie mountaines doth arize;
Through his Heroicke grace, and honorable gest.
His crest was couered with a couchant Hound,
But wondrous massie and assured sound,
In which there written was with cyphers old,
And on his shield enueloped seuenfold
That deckt the azure field with her faire pouldred skin.
his belly, but with his head lifted up")
Troy and hence Brutus: see 210.9:6 ff., 309.38:8 ff.)
surface of the shield or one of its divisions)
fur, white marked with triangular black spots.  It is a
traditional symbol of royalty and chastity}
The Damzell well did vew his personage,
But went her way; ne her vnguilty age
Lay hidden in the bottome of the pot;
But the false Archer, which that arrow shot
Did smyle full smoothly at her weetlesse wofull stound.
right away
Thenceforth the feather in her loftie crest,
And her proud portance, and her princely gest,
Sad, solemne, sowre, and full of fancies fraile
She wist not, silly Mayd, what she did aile,
Yet thought it was not loue, but some melancholy.
So soone as Night had with her pallid hew
And reft from men the worlds desired vew,
But sleepe full farre away from her did fly:
Kept watch and ward about her warily,
Her daintie couch with teares, which closely she did weepe.
And if that any drop of slombring rest
When feeble nature felt her selfe opprest,
Of dreadfull things the same was put to flight,
As one with vew of ghastly feends affright:
And thinke of that faire visage, written in her hart.
One night, when she was tost with such vnrest,
Feeling her leape out of her loathed nest,
And downe againe +in her warme bed her+ dight;
What vncouth fit (said she) what euill plight
Chaunged thy liuely cheare, and liuing made thee dead?
usually applies to glaucous greys, as of the olive, willow, or
vine, or to blue-greys, as of the eyes, and is in Greek mythology
a name of one of the nereids, a personification of the colour of
the sea.  Or perhaps a reference is intended to the Greek _glaux_
(feminine form _glauxe_), the owl, the traditional companion of
Minerva, with whom Britomart is associated.  In Cicero (_De
Natura Deorum_ 3.58), Glauce is the mother of Diana, with whom
Britomart is also associated)
assuredly (i.e. "her name really is `Glauce' rather than the one
you think I mean", in which case Spenser may be playing here some
sophisticated game with meaning for those of his readers able to
discern real people represented in _FQ_)
by any older person to a girl or young woman}
For not of nought these suddeine ghastly feares
And all the day, when as thine equall peares
Thou in dull corners doest thy selfe inclose,
Abroad thy fresh youthes fairest flowre, but lose
As one in wilfull bale for euer buried.
The time, that mortall men their weary cares
And euery riuer eke his course +forbeares,+
And riue with thousand throbs thy thrilled brest;
Sorrow is heaped in thy hollow chest,
As smoke and sulphure mingled with confused strife.
century; its flames were associated with Vulcan's forge.
Perhaps, here, this association alludes to the royal line to be
established by the marriage of Britomart and Artegall)
amplifying her sighs; intention otherwise unclear.  Cf. 303.18:7)
Aye me, how much I feare, least loue it bee;
By knowen signes and passions, which I see,
Then I auow by this most sacred head
And win thy will: Therefore away doe dread;
Shall me debarre, tell me therefore my liefest liefe.
So hauing said, her twixt her armes twaine
And euery trembling ioynt, and euery vaine
To doe the frosen cold away to fly;
She oft did bath, and oft againe did dry;
To let the secret of her hart to her appeare.
The Damzell pauzd, and then thus fearefully;
Is not enough, that I alone doe dye,
For nought for me but death there doth remaine.
For neuer sore, but might a salue obtaine:
Another arrow hath your louers hart to hit.
by any older person to a girl or young woman}
But mine is not (quoth she) like +others+ wound;
Was neuer such, but mote the like be found,
Salue to your sore, yet loue can higher stye,
But neither God of loue, nor God of sky
Things oft impossible (quoth she) seeme, ere begonne.
Cupid; or: God)
These idle words (said she) doe nought asswage
For no no vsuall fire, no vsuall rage
And suckes the bloud, which from my hart doth bleed.
My crime, (if crime it be) I will it reed.
My feeble brest of late, and +launched+ this wound wyde.
"know")
Nor man it is, nor other liuing wight;
But th'only shade and semblant of a knight,
Hath me subiected to loues cruell law:
I in my fathers wondrous mirrhour saw,
Vnwares the hidden hooke with baite I swallowed.
Sithens it hath infixed faster hold
Now ranckleth in this same fraile fleshly mould,
And th'vlcer groweth daily more and more;
Other then my hard fortune to deplore,
Till death make one end of my dayes and miserie.
Daughter (said she) what need ye be dismayd,
Of much more vncouth thing I was affrayd;
But this affection nothing straunge I find;
To loue the semblant pleasing most your mind,
No guilt in you, but in the tyranny of loue.
by any older person to a girl or young woman}
Not so th'_Arabian Myrrhe_ did set her mind;
But lou'd their natiue flesh against all kind,
Yet playd _Pasipha{e"}_ a more +monstrous+ part,
Such shamefull lusts who loaths not, which depart
Sweet loue such lewdnes bands from his faire companie.
birth as a result to the Minotaur; see _Met._ 9.735-44)
"bandies" = "repels")
But thine my Deare (welfare thy heart my deare)
On one, that worthy may perhaps appeare;
Ioy thereof haue thou and eternall blis.
Her +alablaster+ brest she soft did kis,
As it an Earth-quake were; at last she thus bespake.
Beldame, your words doe worke me litle ease;
As those ye blame, yet may it +nought+ appease
But rather doth my helpelesse griefe augment.
Yet did possesse their horrible intent:
So was their fortune good, though wicked were their mind.
in the 16th century, as here, when addressing a nurse}
But wicked fortune mine, though mind be good,
But feed on shadowes, whiles I die for food,
Affection, I doe languish and expire.
Who hauing vewed in a fountaine shere
I fonder loue a shade, the bodie farre exild.
blameless
enamoured of his own reflection in a pool that he gradually pined
away and was metamorphosed into a flower; see _Met._ 3.339-510,
Nought like (quoth she) for that same wretched boy
Both loue and louer, without hope of ioy,
But better fortune thine, and better howre,
No shadow, but a bodie hath in powre:
May learned be by cyphers, or by Magicke might.
plashy, _and so:_ growing by water (i.e. by the fountain; cf.
deciphering occult writings
But if thou may with reason yet represse
And thee abandond wholly doe possesse,
Till thou in open field adowne be smot.
So that needs loue or death must be thy lot,
To compasse thy desire, and find that loued knight.
Her chearefull words much cheard the feeble spright
In her warme bed to sleepe, if that she might;
The clothes about her round with busie ayd;
Surprisd her sense: She therewith well apayd,
And set her by to watch, and set her by to weepe.
Earely the morrow next, before that day
They both vprose and tooke their readie way
With great deuotion, and with litle zeale:
Her loue-sicke hart to other thoughts did steale;
Out of her daughters hart fond fancies to reuerse.
faith); _perhaps also:_ obsequy (cf. _SC_, "November", 60), _and
so:_ ceremony, service
by any older person to a girl or young woman}
Returned home, the royall Infant fell
Nor guidance of her selfe in her did dwell.
Had gathered Rew, and Sauine, and the flowre
All which she in +a+ earthen Pot did poure,
And many drops of milke and bloud through it did spill.
as of Prince Arthur at 208.56:1 etc.)
sorrow and repentance, called the "herb of grace" after the God-
given grace that follows true repentance.  It was used in the
middle ages as a defence against magic; and was prescribed for a
nervous heart, menstrual problems, etc.  Rue was specifically not
to be taken by pregnant women)
of which are abortifacient; cf. 207.52:5)
powerful and volatile oil used in many herbal preparations)
used, like the closely related mints, for nervousness, insomnia,
etc.)
as a calming agent)
(1) green wood ("colt" being an adj. meaning young, immature); or
(2) the tough roots of coltsfoot, _Tussilago farfara_, a herb of
the dandelion family)
three-headed goddess of the underworld associated with witchcraft
and dreams)
Then taking thrise three haires from off her head,
And round about the pots mouth, bound the thread,
Certaine sad words, with hollow voice and bace,
Come daughter come, come; spit vpon my face,
Th'vneuen number for this businesse is most fit.
by any older person to a girl or young woman}
That sayd, her round about she from her turnd,
Thrise she her turnd contrary, and returnd,
And euer what she did, was streight vndonne.
But loue, that is in gentle brest begonne,
That well can witnesse, who by triall it does proue.
Ne ought it mote the noble Mayd auayle,
But that she still did waste, and still did wayle,
She shortly like a pyned ghost became,
That when old _Glauce_ saw, for feare least blame
She wist not how t'amend, nor how it to withstond.
river across which dead souls must pass.  See _Aen._ 6.312 ff.}
_Merlin bewrayes to Britomart,
And shewes the famous Progeny
+MOst+ sacred fire, that burnest mightily
Emongst th'eternall spheres and lamping sky,
Not that same, which doth base affections moue
But that sweet fit, that doth true beautie loue,
Whence spring all noble deeds and neuer dying fame:
Well did Antiquitie a God thee deeme,
To order them, as best to thee doth seeme,
The fatall purpose of diuine foresight,
Through deepe impression of thy secret might,
Which the late world admyres for wondrous moniments.
records
But thy +dread+ darts in none doe triumph more,
Shew'dst thou, then in this royall Maid of yore,
From the worlds end, through many a bitter stowre:
Most famous fruits of matrimoniall bowre,
That fame in trompe of gold eternally displayes.
_hence:_ blazons forth, broadcasts
Begin then, {o^} my dearest sacred Dame,
+That+ doest ennoble with immortall name
In thy great volume of Eternitie:
My glorious Soueraines goodly +auncestrie+,
Thou haue it lastly brought vnto her Excellence.
described as the leader of the choir of Muses and is thus called
"Musagetes".  According to _Myth._ 4.10, the Muses are the
children of Apollo rather than of Jupiter)
Jews": Joshua, David, and Judas Maccabeus; "three pagans":
Hector, Alexander, and Julius Caesar; and "three Christian
knights": Arthur, Charlemagne, and Godfrey of Bouillon.  Spenser
may also be referring to either or both of the two sets of
British worthies: nine privy councillors to William III,
including Lord Pembroke; or the Nine Worthies of London (see
_The Seven Champions of Christendom_ by Richard Johnson, 1592))
Full many wayes within her troubled mind,
Full many waies she sought, but none could find,
And choisest med'cine for sicke harts reliefe:
Least that it should her turne to foule repriefe,
Should of his dearest daughters hard misfortune heare.
At last she her +auisd+, that he, which made
So straungely vewed her straunge louers shade,
Vnder what coast of heauen the man did dwell,
For though beyond the _Africk Ismaell_,
Him forth through infinite endeuour to haue sought.
Mohameddans generally, who were held to be descendants of
Ishmael)
Ismael_", it was an outpost of the known world.  Cf. 200.2:6)
Forthwith themselues disguising both in straunge
To _Maridunum_, that is now by chaunge
There the wise _Merlin_ whylome wont (they say)
In a deepe delue, farre from the vew of day,
When so he counseld with his sprights encompast round.
Merlin)
And if thou euer happen that same way
It is an hideous hollow caue (they say)
From the swift _Barry_, tombling downe apace,
But dare thou not, I charge, in any cace,
For fear the cruell Feends should thee vnwares deuowre.
But standing high aloft, low lay thine eare,
And brasen Caudrons thou shalt rombling heare,
Doe tosse, that it will stonne thy feeble braines,
When too huge toile and labour them constraines:
From vnder that deepe Rocke most horribly rebounds.
The cause some say is this: A litle while
A brasen wall in compas to compile
Vnto these Sprights, to bring to perfect end.
Whom long he lou'd, for him in hast did send,
Them bound till his returne, their labour not to slake.
In the meane time through that false Ladies traine,
Ne euer to his worke returnd againe:
So greatly his commaundement they feare,
Vntill that brasen wall they vp doe reare:
Then euer him before or after liuing wight.
sepulchre ("bier" sometimes taking this meaning by transference)
For he by words could call out of the sky
The land to sea, and sea to maineland dry,
Huge hostes of men he could alone dismay,
When so him list his enimies to fray:
The feends do quake, when any him to them does name.
And sooth, men say that he was not the sonne
But wondrously begotten, and begonne
On a faire Ladie Nonne, that whilome hight
Who was the Lord of _Mathrauall_ by right,
Whence he indued was with skill so maruellous.
Lady of Maids" (Camden (1605) noted by Hamilton (1980); this name
and that of Pubidius do not occur in _HRB_)
They here ariuing, staid a while without,
But of their first intent gan make new dout
Vntill the hardie Mayd (with loue to frend)
Deepe busied bout worke of wondrous end,
With which the stubborn feends he to his seruice bound.
He nought was moued at their entrance bold:
Yet list them bid their businesse +to+ vnfold,
Were from him hidden, or vnknowne of yore.
That we thus rashly through thy darkesome dore,
Or other mightie cause vs two did hither send.
into another's presence, to intrude}
He bad tell on; And then she thus began.
Thrice shined faire, and thrice seem'd dim and wan,
Tormenteth, and doth plonge in dolefull plight,
Or whence it sprong, I cannot read aright:
Thou her afford, full shortly I her dead shall see.
evil (adj.)
Therewith th'Enchaunter softly gan to smyle
That she to him dissembled womanish guyle,
More need of leach-craft hath your Damozell,
In vaine seekes wonders out of Magicke spell.
And yet was loth to let her purpose plaine appeare.
And to him said, If any leaches skill,
This my deare daughters deepe engraffed ill,
But this sad euill, which doth her infest,
And housed is within her hollow brest,
Or euill spright, that in her doth such torment breed.
by any older person to a girl or young woman}
The wisard could no +lenger+ beare her bord,
_Glauce_, what needs this colourable word,
Ne ye faire _Britomartis_, thus arayd,
Whom thy good fortune, hauing fate obayd,
The which the powres to thee are pleased to reuele.
make advances to)
The doubtfull Mayd, seeing her selfe descryde,
Into a cleare Carnation suddeine dyde;
Doth by her blushing tell, that she did lye
Whereof she seemes ashamed inwardly.
But vauntage made of that, which _Merlin_ had ared.
And sayd, Sith then thou knowest all our griefe,
Pitty our plaint, and yield vs meet reliefe.
And then his spirite thus gan forth display;
Hast learn'd to loue, let no whit thee dismay
And with sharpe fits thy tender hart oppresseth sore.
seeking redress}
"motionless (or quiet) awhile did remain"; (2) "yet awhile did
For so must all things excellent begin,
Whose big embodied braunches shall not lin,
For from thy wombe a famous Progenie
Which shall reuiue the sleeping memorie
Which +_Greeke_+ and _Asian_ riuers stained with their blood.
scion will be Elizabeth}
Renowmed kings, and sacred Emperours,
Braue Captaines, and most mighty warriours,
And their decayed kingdomes shall amend:
They shall vpreare, and mightily defend
Till vniuersall peace compound all ciuill iarre.
here, specifically because Britomart's lineage can be traced back
to Aeneas, whose father, Anchises, was a mortal, and whose
mother, Venus, was a goddess}
It was not, _Britomart_, thy wandring eye,
But the streight course of heauenly destiny,
Guided thy glaunce, to bring his will to pas:
To loue the prowest knight, that euer was.
And do by all dew meanes thy destiny fulfill.
But read (said _Glauce_) thou Magitian
How shall she know, how shall she find the man?
Way for themselues, their purpose to partake?
And may not shrinck, though all the world do shake:
And guide the heauenly causes to their constant terme.
The man whom heauens haue ordaynd to bee
He wonneth in the land of _Fayeree_,
To Elfes, but sprong of seed terrestriall,
Whiles yet in infant cradle he did crall;
But that he by an Elfe was gotten of a _Fay_.
But sooth he is the sonne of _Gorlois_,
And for his warlike feates renowmed is,
Vntill the closure of the Euening.
To this his natiue soyle thou backe shalt bring,
The powre of forrein Paynims, which inuade thy land.
who, after his death, married Uther Pendragon, the father of
Arthur)
defeating the Saxons)
Great aid thereto his mighty puissaunce,
Where also proofe of thy prow valiaunce
Long time ye both in armes shall beare great sway,
And his last fate him from thee take away,
Of secret foes, that him shall make in mischiefe fall.
+With+ thee yet shall he leaue for memory
That liuing him in all actiuity
Of his coosin _Constantius_ without dread
And therewith crowne himselfe in th'others stead:
Against his Saxon foes in bloudy field to fight.
by his nephew, Aurelius Conan.  See _HRB_ 11.2, 11.4)
were originally inhabitants of the lower Elbe Valley.  They were
a warlike people who spread mainly to the south and west; they
landed in Britain in 449.  By the end of the sixth century they
had conquered most of NW Europe.  With the Angles and the Jutes
they established the beginnings of Anglo-Saxon culture in
England)
Like as a Lyon, that in drowsie caue
And comming forth, shall spred his banner braue
The warlike _Mertians_ for feare to quake:
But the third time shall faire accordaunce make:
He shall his dayes with peace bring to his earthly In.
England)
His sonne, hight _Vortipore_, shall him succeede
Yet shall he long time warre with happy speed,
But at the last to th'importunity
But his sonne _Malgo_ shall full mightily
And his proud foes discomfit in victorious field.
Behold the man, and tell me _Britomart_,
How like a Gyaunt in each manly part
That one of th'old _Heroes_ seemes to bee:
In auncient times vnto great Britainee,
Their sundry kings to do their homage seuerall.
Denmark)
All which his sonne _Careticus_ awhile
Vntill a straunger king from +vnknowne+ soyle
Great _Gormond_, hauing with huge mightinesse
Like a swift Otter, fell through emptinesse,
Of his Norueyses, to assist the Britons fone.
He in his furie all shall ouerrunne,
That thy sad people vtterly fordonne,
Was neuer so great wast in any place,
For all thy Cities they shall sacke and race,
That euen the wild beast shall dy in starued den.
Whiles thus +thy+ Britons do in languour pine,
Seruing th'ambitious will of _Augustine_,
Shall backe repulse the valiaunt _Brockwell_ twise,
But the third time shall rew his foolhardise:
Shall stoutly him defeat, and thousand _Saxons_ kill.
But after him, _Cadwallin_ mightily
Ne shall auaile the wicked sorcery
But him shall slay, and on a gallowes bleake
Then shall the Britons, late dismayd and weake,
And on their Paynim foes auenge their ranckled ire.
Ne shall he yet his wrath so mitigate,
_Offricke_ and _Osricke_, twinnes vnfortunate,
Together with the king of _Louthiane_,
Both ioynt partakers of +their+ fatall paine:
Shall yield him selfe his liegeman, and sweare fealty.
Him shall he make his fatall Instrument,
He marching forth with fury insolent
With heauenly powre, and by Angels reskewd,
Shall him defeate withouten bloud imbrewd:
Shall _Heuenfield_ be cald to all posterity.
Whereat _Cadwallin_ wroth, shall forth issew,
With which he godly _Oswald_ shall subdew,
Whose brother _Oswin_, daunted with like dread,
And _Penda_, seeking him adowne to tread,
But shall with gifts his Lord _Cadwallin_ pacify.
Then shall _Cadwallin_ dye, and then the raine
Ne shall the good _Cadwallader_ with paine,
When the full time prefixt by destiny,
For heauen it selfe shall their successe enuy,
Consume, till all their warlike puissaunce be spent.
Yet after all these sorrowes, and huge hills
_Cadwallader_ not yielding to his ills,
He liu'd, returning to his natiue place,
For th'heauens haue decreed, to displace
And to the _Saxons_ ouer-giue their gouernment.
Then woe, and woe, and euerlasting woe,
To liue in thraldome of his fathers foe;
The worlds reproch, the cruell victours scorne,
O who shall helpe me to lament, and mourne
Whose Empire lenger here, then euer any stood.
represents a period of some 1,822 years)
The Damzell was full deepe empassioned,
Whose future woes so plaine he fashioned,
Ah but will heauens fury neuer slake,
Will not long misery late mercy make,
And quite from +of the earth+ their memory be rast?
Nay but the terme (said he) is limited,
And the iust reuolution measured,
For twise foure hundredth +yeares+ +shalbe supplide+,
And their importune fates all satisfide:
Their beames shall oft breake forth, that men them faire may see.
death of Cadwallader in about 690 and the enthronement of Henry
VII in 1485)
For _Rhodoricke_, whose surname shalbe Great,
That Saxon kings his friendship shall intreat;
The saluage minds with skill of iust and trew;
His dreaded head, and +the old+ sparkes renew
Least backe againe the kingdome he from them should beare.
Ne shall the Saxons selues all peaceably
First ill, and after ruled wickedly:
There shall a Rauen far from rising Sunne,
And bid his faithlesse chickens ouerronne
In their auenge, tread downe the victours surquedry.
Yet shall a third both these, and thine subdew;
Of _Neustria_ come roring, with a crew
Whose clawes were newly dipt in cruddy blood,
Th'vsurped crowne, as if that he were wood,
Emongst his young ones shall diuide with bountyhed.
mouth of the Schelde to the Loire; later developed into the
kingdom of France; hence, here, = "France")
Tho when the terme is full accomplishid,
Bene in his ashes raked vp, and hid,
Of _Mona_, where it lurked in exile;
And reach into the house, that beares the stile
So shall the Briton bloud their crowne againe reclame.
VII, to whom Spenser is almost certainly alluding, was actually
born at Pembroke Castle.  Henry VII was the first of the Tudor
monarchs, the grandfather of Queen Elizabeth)
Thenceforth eternall vnion shall be made
And sacred Peace shall louingly perswade
And ciuile armes to exercise no more:
Stretch her white rod ouer the _Belgicke_ shore,
That it shall make him shake, and shortly learne to fall.
or white wand) carried by certain officials, such as the steward
of the sovereign's household.  Cf. 101.5:5, 209.27:7}
Countries.  See I:640}
huge Castles of Castilian king", meaning the galleons of the
Armada)
But yet the end is not.  There _Merlin_ stayd,
Or other ghastly spectacle dismayd,
Which suddein fit, and halfe extatick stoure
Greatly confused in behauioure;
+Hee+ turnd againe, and chearefull looks +as earst+ did shew.
Then, when them selues they well instructed had
They both conceiuing hope of comfort glad,
Where they in secret counsell close conspird,
And to possesse the purpose they desird:
And diuerse plots did frame, to maske in strange +disguise+.
At last the Nourse in her foolhardy wit
Daughter, I deeme that counsell aye most fit,
Ye see that good king _Vther_ now doth make
_Octa_ and _Oza_, whom he lately brake
That now all _Britanie_ doth burne in armes bright.
by any older person to a girl or young woman}
Together with his kinsman Eosa he launched an attack on Uther
Pendragon in c. 475)
That therefore nought our passage may empeach,
And our weake hands +(whom need new strength shall teach)+
Ne certes daughter that same warlike wize
And large of limbe, t'atchieue an hard emprize,
Will bring, and shortly make you a mayd Martiall.
teach _1590;_ (whom need new strength shall teach _1596, 1609;
only the 1590 reading makes sense, though 1596 is clearly an
author's correction.  The given version is a conjecture of
various editors.  The closing bracket after _teach_ may have been
overlooked because line 3 is too wide to fit the page; the final
word has been broken and placed at the end of line 2, separated
from it with an opening bracket, thus:_ ... selues disguize,
(teach
by any older person to a girl or young woman}
And sooth, it ought your courage much inflame,
From whence to none inferiour ye came:
Which haue full many feats aduenturous
The bold _Bunduca_, whose victorious
Renowmed _Martia_, and redoubted _Emmilen_.
consorts of
the mother of Sir Tristram at 602.29)
And that, which more then all the rest may sway,
In the last field before _Meneuia_
I saw a _Saxon_ Virgin, the which feld
And had not _Carados_ her hand withheld
Yet _Carados_ himselfe from her escapt with paine.
finding a way to lie with Igerna: see _HRB_ 8.19)
Ah read, (quoth _Britomart_) how is she hight?
No whit lesse faire, then terrible in fight:
And mighty people, dreaded more then all
And loue, themselues of her name _Angles_ call.
Vnto thy selfe, and equall courage to thee take.
as of Prince Arthur at 208.56:1 etc.)
Her harty words so deepe into the mynd
Of warlike armes in her forthwith they tynd,
That she resolu'd, +vnweeting+ to her Sire,
And counseld with her Nourse, her Maides attire
And bad her all things put in readinesse anon.
Th'old woman nought, that needed, did omit;
It fortuned (so time their turne did fit)
Few +dayes+ before, had gotten a great pray
A goodly Armour, and full rich aray,
All fretted round with gold, and goodly well beseene.
The same, with all the other ornaments,
In his chiefe Church, for endlesse moniments
Of which her selfe auising readily,
Faire _Britomart_, and that same Armory
Well as she might, and with braue bauldrick garnished.
sword)
Beside those armes there stood a mighty speare,
And vsd the same in battell aye to beare;
For his great vertues proued long afore:
But him perforce vnto the ground it bore:
Both speare and shield of great powre, for her purpose +fit.+
Thus when she had the virgin all arayd,
About her selfe she dight, that the young Mayd
And as her Squire attend her carefully:
And through back wayes, that none might them espy,
Themselues they forth conuayd, and passed forward right.
Ne rested they, till that to Faery lond
Where meeting with this _Redcrosse_ knight, she fond
But most of _Arthegall_, and his estate.
Then each to other well affectionate,
The _Redcrosse_ knight diuerst, but forth rode _Britomart_.
_Bold Marinell of Britomart,
Faire Florimell of Arthur is
or sea-nymphs of the Mediterranean.  The name is derived from the
Latin _marinus_, marine)
jewels, and gold)
WHere is the Antique glory now become,
Where be the braue atchieuements doen by some?
And all the conquests, which them high did reare,
And boastfull men so oft +abasht+ to heare?
Or doen they onely sleepe, and shall againe reuerse?
If they be dead, then woe is me therefore:
For all too long I burne with enuy sore,
Of bold _P{ae}nthesilee_, which made a lake
But when I read, how stout _Debora_ strake
The huge _Orsilochus_, I swell with great disdaine.
After Hector's death, she came to the aid of the Trojans, but was
finally killed by Achilles (or his son Neoptolemus, according to
popular legend).  She is not, incidentally, described by Homer,
but see _Aen._ 1.490-3, where she leads the Amazons into battle)
Jael)
including two of the tallest, Orsilochus and But{e"}s.  See _Aen._
feats); _or, perhaps:_ scorn (excited by the suppression by men
of such feats performed by modern women)
Yet these, and all that else had puissaunce,
Aswell for glory of great valiaunce,
That all her goodly deeds do well declare.
That in late yeares so faire a blossome bare,
Whose lignage from this Lady I deriue along.
directly
Who when through speaches with the _Redcrosse_ knight,
And in each point her selfe informd aright,
She with him bound, and _Cong{e/}_ tooke withall.
To seeke aduentures, which mote him befall,
Which alwayes of his paines he made the chiefest meed.
But _Britomart_ kept on her former course,
Grew pensiue through that amorous discourse,
Her louers shape, and cheualrous aray;
And in her feigning fancie did pourtray
Wise, warlike, personable, curteous, and kind.
complementing "shape":_ outfit, attire, _hence:_ armour
With such selfe-pleasing thoughts her wound she fed,
But so her smart was much more grieuous bred,
That nought but death her dolour mote depart.
Searching all lands and each remotest part,
Till that +to the+ sea-coast at length she +her+ +addrest.+
whom they hit.  He is often depicted wearing a blindfold.
"Guest" here might = "foe" (from the Latin  _hostis_) or perhaps
the modern sense applies, in that he is a guest (albeit
There she +alighted+ from her light-foot beast,
Bad her old Squire vnlace her lofty creast;
That gainst the craggy clifts did loudly rore,
That the fast earth affronted them so sore,
Thereat she sighed deepe, and after thus complaynd.
Latin _frons_, in at least two senses: (1) "forehead" (cf.
Huge sea of sorrow, and tempestuous griefe,
Far from the hoped hauen of reliefe,
And thy moyst mountaines each on others throng,
O do thy cruell wrath and spightfull wrong
Which in +these+ troubled bowels raignes, and rageth rife.
For else my feeble vessell crazd, and crackt
Cannot endure, but needs it must be wrackt
The whiles that loue it steres, and fortune rowes;
And fortune Boteswaine no assuraunce knowes,
How can they other do, sith both are bold and blind?
Thou God of winds, that raignest in the seas,
At last blow vp some gentle gale of ease,
Vnto the gladsome port of her intent:
A table for eternall moniment
Great _Neptune_, I auow to hallow vnto thee.
supplication might be addressed to Neptune as the "sea of sorrow"
of 304.8:1)
Then sighing softly sore, and inly deepe,
For her great courage would not let her weepe,
Her to restraine, and giue her good reliefe,
Should of her name and nation be chiefe,
Of her immortall wombe, to be in heauen enrold.
an intensive_
Thus as she her recomforted, she spyde,
With hastie gallop towards her did ryde;
Her Helmet, to her Courser mounting light:
Both coosen passions of distroubled spright,
Loue and despight attonce her courage kindled hath.
As when a foggy mist hath ouercast
The world in darkenesse dwels, till that at last
Vpblowing, doth disperse the vapour lo'st,
So the faire _Britomart_ hauing disclo'st
The mist of griefe dissolu'd, +did+ into vengeance +powre.+
be tautological)
Eftsoones her goodly shield addressing faire,
And vnto battell did her selfe prepaire.
Sir knight, that doest thy voyage rashly make
Ne doest by others death ensample take,
Least afterwards it be too late to take thy flight.
mortal = lethal)
sonne")
Ythrild with deepe disdaine of his proud threat,
Words fearen babes.  I meane not thee entreat
Ne lenger stayd for th'other to reply,
+Strongly+ the straunge knight ran, and sturdily
Decline her head, and touch her crouper with her crowne.
catachr. as a general imprecation or indication of ill-will: here
the sense might be taken as "like it or lump it")
under the horse's tail; the horse's rump}
But she againe him in the shield did smite
That through his threesquare scuchin percing quite,
The wicked steele through his left side did glaunce;
Beyond his croupe, the length of all her launce,
He tombled on an heape, and wallowd in his gore.
Like as the sacred Oxe, that carelesse stands,
Proud of his dying honor and deare bands,
All suddenly with mortall stroke astownd,
Distaines the pillours, and the holy grownd,
So fell proud _Marinell_ vpon the pretious shore.
The martiall Mayd stayd not him to lament,
Along the strond, which as she ouer-went,
Of pearles and pretious stones of great assay,
Whereat she wondred much, but would not stay
But them despised all; for all was in her powre.
Whiles thus he lay in deadly stonishment,
His mother was the blacke-browd _Cymoent_,
This warlike sonne vnto an earthly peare,
Finding the Nymph a sleepe in secret wheare,
Was taken with her loue, and by her closely lay.
_kyma_, wave.  She is one of the nereids, sister of Thetis, the
mother of Achilles, whom Cymodoc{e"} comforts in the _Iliad_ 18.39.
She also appears, with other sea-deities, at _Aen._ 5.826)
bottom of the sea, being especially associated with the Aegean;
like Proteus, he is said to have the power of prophecy)
There he this knight of her begot, whom borne
And in a rocky caue as wight forlorne,
A mightie man at armes, and mickle fame
For neuer man he suffred by that same
But that he must do battell with the Sea-nymphes sonne.
An hundred knights of honorable name
That through all Farie lond his noble fame
That none durst passen through that perilous glade.
Her Sea-god syre she dearely did perswade,
Boue all the sonnes, that were of earthly wombes ybore.
meaning a bright, shining or beautiful place.  An obsolete
meaning is "clear or bright space in the sky".  Hamilton (1980)
suggests that the coinage/catachresis might be prompted to remind
the reader of Mammon's glade at 207.3:1)
wombs borne
The God did graunt his daughters deare demaund,
Eftsoones his heaped waues he did commaund,
All the huge threasure, which the sea below
And him enriched through the ouerthrow
And often waile their wealth, which he from them did keepe.
Shortly vpon that shore there heaped was,
The spoyle of all the world, that it did pas
Gold, amber, yuorie, perles, owches, rings,
The sea vnto him voluntary brings,
As was in all the lond of Faery, or elsewheare.
amber or spermaceti; and: amber (the fossil resin, used for
ornaments)}
Thereto he was a doughtie dreaded knight,
That none in equall armes him matchen might,
Least his too haughtie hardines might reare
For thy she oft him counseld to forbeare
But after all his warre, to rest his wearie knife.
And for his more assurance, she inquir'd
(For _Proteus_ was with prophecie inspir'd)
And the sad end of her sweet _Marinell_.
Bad her from womankind to keepe him well:
A virgin strange and stout him should dismay, or kill.
(see _Met._ 11.249-56, _Odyssey_ 4))
For thy she gaue him warning euery day,
A lesson too too hard for liuing clay,
Yet he his mothers lore did well retaine,
Yet many Ladies faire did oft complaine,
Dy, who so list for him, he was loues enimy.
"chose")
But ah, who can deceiue his destiny,
That when he sleepes in most security,
And findeth dew effect or soone or late.
His mother bad him womens loue to hate,
So weening to haue arm'd him, she did quite disarme.
Britomart can be said to personify the destiny foretold by
Proteus)
This was that woman, this that deadly wound,
The which his mother vainely did expound,
To bring her sonne vnto his last decay.
And full of subtile sophismes, which do play
T'approue the vnknowen purpose of eternall fate.
absence of a comma at the end of the line:_ essay, attempt
Too true the famous _Marinell_ it fownd,
Inglorious now lies in senselesse swownd,
Which when his mother deare did vnderstond,
Amongst her watry sisters by a pond,
Gay girlonds, from the Sun their forheads faire to +shade.+
applied to "understand")
Eftsoones both flowres and girlonds farre away
To sorrow huge she turnd her former play,
She threw her selfe downe on the Continent,
Whiles all her sisters did for her lament,
And euery one did teare her girlond from her crowne.
Soone as she vp out of her deadly fit
And all her sisters, that with her did sit,
Tho full of bitter griefe and pensiue thought,
And forth together went, with sorrow fraught.
Them yielded readie passage, and their rage surceast.
Great _Neptune_ stood amazed at their sight,
And eke himselfe mournd at their mournfull plight,
For great compassion of their sorrow, bid
Eftsoones the roaring billowes still abid,
Stood gaping at their gate, and wondred them to see.
A teme of Dolphins raunged in +aray+,
They were all taught by _Triton_, to obay
As swift as swallowes, on the waues they went,
Ne bubbling roundell they behind them sent;
Which with their finny oars the swelling sea did sheare.
spacing between words in the early editions is often very tight.
Cf. 209.7:9_
Cymodoc{e"}; his chief characteristic is his shell-trumpet, which he
blows to quieten the waves; for his command over dolphins, see
_Myth._ 8.3)
skim the surface of fresh water in order to drink)
have been gained from woodcuts in medieval bestiaries and the
like)
Soone as they bene arriu'd vpon the brim
And let their temed fishes softly swim
Least they their finnes should bruze, and surbate sore
And comming to the place, where all in gore
The lucklesse _Marinell_, lying in deadly swound;
His mother swowned thrise, and the third time
Had she not bene deuoyd of mortall slime,
But soone as life recouered had the raine,
That the hard rocks could scarse from teares refraine,
Supplide her sobbing breaches with sad complement.
Deare image of my selfe (she said) that is,
Is this thine high aduauncement, {o^} is this
Thy Gransire _Nereus_ promist to adorne?
Now lyest thou a lumpe of earth forlorne,
Ne can thy irreuocable destiny be weft?
exactly translatable: a conjunctional intensification of "no")
Fond _Proteus_, father of false prophecis,
Not this the worke of womans hand ywis,
I feared loue: but they that loue do liue,
Nath'lesse to thee thy folly I forgiue,
The guilt I doe ascribe: deare wisedome bought too late.
know (contemptuous of Proteus's "false prophecis")
O what auailes it of immortall seed
Farre better I it deeme to die with speed,
Who dyes the vtmost dolour doth abye,
So life is losse, and death felicitie.
To see friends graue, then dead the graue selfe to engrosse.
But if the heauens did his dayes enuie,
Thus much afford me, ere that he did die
I mote haue closed, and him +bed+ farewell,
They would not graunt.
Farewell my sweetest sonne, +sith we no more shall+ meet.
Thus when they all had sorrowed their fill,
And that they might him handle more at will,
Their watchet mantles frindgd with siluer round,
From th'orifice; which hauing well vpbound,
Good both for earthly med'cine, and for heauenly food.
Tho when the lilly handed _Liagore_,
In leaches craft, by great _Appolloes_ lore,
He loued, and at last her wombe did fill
Did feele his pulse, she knew +there+ staied still
Which to his mother told, despeire she from her flong.
Hesiod, _Theogony_ 257)
Aesculapius, the god of healing; associated with Paean, though
the details of Paean's conception are apparently invented by
Spenser)
"Pindus" was confined to that part which separates Thessaly and
Epirus)
Tho +vp him+ taking in their tender hands,
Her teme at her commaundement quiet stands,
And strow with flowres the lamentable beare:
And through the brackish waues their passage sheare;
And to her watry chamber swiftly carry him.
Deepe in the bottome of the sea, her bowre
Like to thicke cloudes, that threat a stormy showre,
In which the Gods do dwell eternally:
And sent in haste for _Tryphon_, to apply
For _Tryphon_ of sea gods the soueraine leach is hight.
Aesculapius, according to _DGDG_ 7.36)
The whiles the _Nymphes_ sit all about him round,
And oft his mother vewing his wide wound,
Her dearest sonne, her dearest harts delight.
The warlike Maid, th'ensample of that might,
Her noble deeds, ne her right course for ought forsooke.
perpetrator
Yet did false _Archimage_ her still pursew,
Now that he had her singled from the crew
Whom late in chace of beautie excellent
Of whose foule outrage they impatient,
To reskew her from shame, and to reuenge her wrong.
something of a puzzle.  Cf. 301.0:3, in which Duessa is
mentioned: yet she does not feature in Book III.  Perhaps these
are traces of a subsequently revised synopsis)
Through thick and thin, through mountaines and through plains,
The fearefull damzell, with incessant paines:
Of +hunter+ swift, and sent of houndes trew.
Where, doubtfull which to take, her to reskew,
Whether more happie were, to win so goodly pray.
But _Timias_, the Princes gentle Squire,
And with proud enuy, and indignant ire,
So beene they three three sundry wayes ybent.
Whose chaunce it was, that soone he did +repent,+
Was fled afore, affraid of him, as feend of hell.
At last of her farre off he gained vew:
And euer as he nigher to her drew,
And of each turning still kept warie heed:
To doe away vaine doubt, and needlesse dreed:
Many meeke wordes, to stay and comfort her withall.
But nothing might relent her hastie flight;
Was earst impressed in her gentle spright:
Of the wide aire her way does cut amaine,
Which after her his nimble wings doth straine,
And with her pineons cleaues the liquid firmament.
within the forest, _hence:_ forester
superlative, implying painful effect or overpowering; "hend" =
"seize", "lay hold of", "take", "grasp")
With no lesse haste, and eke with no lesse dreed,
To her no euill thought, nor euill deed;
Carried her forward with her first intent:
Her selfe freed from that foster insolent,
Yet she no lesse the knight feard, then that villein rude.
attached (cf. 203.11:9)
intended at 304.49:2)
His vncouth shield and straunge armes her dismayd,
That fast she from him fled, no lesse affrayd,
Yet he her followd still with courage keene,
Was mounted high in top of heauen sheene,
To light their blessed lamps in _Ioues_ eternall hous.
star; Venus is also the morning star.  Hesperus is, as here,
accorded male gender at 102.6.  For a clue to the analogy between
Florimell and the Faery Queen, see 107.30:4)
"_Hesperus_" and "heauen")
All suddenly dim woxe the dampish ayre,
That now with thousand starres was decked fayre;
And that perforce, for want of lenger light,
Of his long labour, he gan fowly wyte
And cursed night, that reft from him so goodly scope.
Tho when her wayes he could no more descry,
Like as a ship, whose Lodestarre suddenly
His wearisome pursuit perforce he stayd,
Did let him forage.  Downe himselfe he layd
The cold earth was his couch, the hard steele his pillow.
success ("disadventure" = "misfortune", "mischance")
But gentle Sleepe enuyde him any rest;
Of his hard hap did vexe his noble brest,
With their light wings, the sights of semblants vaine:
His Faery Queene, for whom he did complaine:
And euer hastie Night he blamed bitterlie.
means Somnus, the god of sleep; or perhaps his son, Morpheus (see
hasty", and "ever-hasty".  Cf. 102.37:9)
Gloriana)
Night thou foule Mother of annoyance sad,
Which wast begot in heauen, but for thy bad
Where by the grim floud of _Cocytus_ slow
(Blacke _Herebus_ thy husband is the foe
Halfe of thy dayes doest lead in horrour hideous.
repulsive, offensive
What had th'eternall Maker need of thee,
That doest all things deface, ne lettest see
The slouthfull bodie, that doth loue to steepe
Doth praise thee oft, and oft from _Stygian_ deepe
And great Dame Natures handmaide, chearing euery kind.
river which dead souls must cross}
But well I wote, that to an heauy hart
Breeder of new, renewer of old smarts:
In stead of sleepe thou sendest troublous feares,
The drearie image of sad death appeares:
Desired rest, and men of happinesse depriue.
Vnder thy mantle blacke there hidden lye,
Abhorred bloudshed, and vile felony,
Foule horror, and eke hellish dreriment:
And light doe shonne, for feare of being shent:
And all that lewdnesse loue, doe hate the light to see.
For day discouers all dishonest wayes,
The prayses of high God he faire displayes,
+Dayes dearest children+ be the blessed seed,
Truth is his daughter; he her first did breed,
Our life is day, but death with darknesse doth begin.
O when will day then turne to me againe,
O _Titan_, haste to reare thy ioyous waine:
And chase away this too long lingring night,
She, she it is, that hath me done despight:
And yeeld her roome to day, that can it gouerne well.
across the sky)
Thus did the Prince that wearie night outweare,
And earely, ere the morrow did vpreare
He vp arose, as halfe in great disdaine,
With heauie looke and lumpish pace, that plaine
His steed eke seem'd t'apply his steps to his intent.
_Prince Arthur heares of Florimell:
Belphebe finds him almost dead,
alternative spelling of _swowne, swoune_ etc.  Cf. 601.34:2_
WOnder it is to see, in diuerse minds,
And shewes his powre in variable kinds:
Are wont to cleaue vnto the lowly clay,
And in lewd slouth to wast his carelesse day:
That to all high desert and honour doth aspire.
Ne suffereth it vncomely idlenesse,
Ne suffereth it thought of vngentlenesse,
But to the highest and the worthiest
It lets not fall, it lets it not to rest:
But to his first poursuit him forward still doth call.
Who long time wandred through the forrest wyde,
He met a Dwarfe, that seemed terrifyde
Or other accident, which him aghast;
And whither now he trauelled so fast:
Thicke forest, was bescratcht, and both his feet nigh lame.
Panting for breath, and almost out of hart,
To tell the same.  I lately did depart
Serued a gentle Lady of great sway,
Who lately left the same, and tooke this way:
Which way she fared hath, good Sir tell out of hand.
What mister wight (said he) and how arayd?
As meetest may beseeme a noble mayd;
+A+ fairer wight did neuer Sunne behold,
Yet she her selfe is whiter manifold:
Is, that she is the fairest wight aliue, I trow.
sort)
coiled in a circle, or she wears a golden or jewelled circlet in
which her hair is coiled)
Now certes swaine (said he) such one I weene,
A foule ill fauoured foster, I haue seene;
But could not stay; so fast she did foregoe,
Ah dearest God (quoth he) that is great woe,
But can ye read Sir, how I may her find, or +where?+
Perdy me leuer were to weeten that,
Or all the good that euer yet I gat:
Such happinesse did, maulgre, to me spight,
But Dwarfe aread, what is that Lady bright,
For of her errour straunge I haue great ruth and mone.
Spenser more or less catachr. as a general imprecation or
indication of ill-will)
That Lady is (quoth he) where so she bee,
That euer liuing eye I weene did see;
In stedfast chastitie and vertue rare,
And is ycleped _Florimell_ the faire,
Yet she loues none but one, that _Marinell_ is hight.
A Sea-nymphes sonne, that _Marinell_ is hight,
In other none, but him, she sets delight,
But he sets nought at all by _Florimell_:
Did him, they say, forwarne through sacred spell.
He is yslaine, which is the ground of all our woe.
accursed, after Latin _sacer_}
Fiue dayes there be, since he (they say) was slaine,
And vowed neuer to returne againe,
Therefore, faire Sir, for loue of knighthood gent,
By your good counsell, or bold hardiment,
Do one, or other good, I you most humbly pray.
Marinell's encounter with Britomart; 308.46 agrees with the
dwarf's version)
So may +you+ gaine to you full great renowme,
And haply in her hart find highest rowme,
At least eternall meede shall you abide.
For till thou tidings learne, what her betide,
Ill weares he armes, that nill them vse for Ladies sake.
So with the Dwarfe he backe return'd againe,
But by the way he greatly gan complaine
For whom he wondrous pensiue grew in mind,
For him he loued aboue all mankind,
And bold, as euer Squire that waited by knights side.
Who all this while full hardly was assayd
For whiles his Lord pursewd that noble Mayd,
To bene auenged of the shame, he did
Through the thicke woods, wherein he would haue hid
And oft him threatned death for his outrageous wrong.
Nathlesse the villen sped himselfe so well,
Or knowledge of those woods, where he did dwell,
And out of sight escaped at the least;
Of his bad deeds, which dayly he increast,
The heauy plague, that for such leachours is prepard.
intended at 304.49:2)
as_ at the last, at last_: cf. 305.37:9, 305.43:8_
possibly a reference to venereal disease)
For soone as he was vanisht out of sight,
And cast t'auenge him of that fowle despight,
Tho to his brethren came: for they were three
And vnto them complained, how that he
So them with bitter words he stird to bloudy ire.
Forthwith themselues with their sad instruments
And with him forth into the forest went,
In their sterne brests, on him which late did driue
For they had vow'd, that neuer he aliue
Vile rancour their rude harts had fild with such despight.
Within that wood there was a couert glade,
Through which it was vneath for wight to wade;
By that same way they knew that Squire vnknowne
There in await, with thicke woods ouer growne,
With cruell threats, his passage through the ford to let.
It fortuned, as they deuized had,
Vnweeting of their wile and treason bad,
But that fierce foster, which late fled away,
Him boldly bad his passage there to stay,
For all the damage, which he had him doen afore.
With that at him a quiu'ring dart he threw,
That through his haberieon the forkehead flew,
But had no powre in his soft flesh to bite:
But more that him he could not come to smite;
But labour'd long in that deepe ford with vaine disease.
And still the foster with his long bore-speare
Anone one sent out of the thicket neare
And fethered with an vnlucky quill;
In his left thigh, and deepely did it thrill:
But more that with his foes he could not come to fight.
At last through wrath and vengeaunce making way,
Where the third brother did him sore assay,
A forrest bill, which both his hands did straine;
And with his speare requited him againe,
And a large streame of bloud out of the wound did flow.
He tombling downe, with gnashing teeth did bite
Into the balefull house of endlesse night,
Tho gan the battell freshly to begin;
Did th'other two their cruell vengeaunce blin,
And load vpon him layd, his life for to haue had.
cf. 101.16:7)
Tho when that villain he auiz'd, which late
Full of fiers fury, and indignant hate,
Smote him so rudely on the Pannikell,
Downe on the ground his carkas groueling fell;
Out of her fleshly ferme fled to the place of paine.
cultivation, hence: temporary abode)
That seeing now the onely last of three,
Trembling with horrour, as that did foresee
Through which he follow should his brethren bad,
And therewith shot an arrow at the lad;
And glauncing fell to ground, but him annoyed naught.
With that he would haue fled into the wood;
Right as he entring was into the flood,
That headlesse him into the foord he sent:
But th'head fell backeward on the Continent.
They three be dead with shame, the Squire liues with renowne.
margin}
He liues, but takes small ioy of his renowne;
That from his steed he fell in deadly swowne;
That he lay wallowd all in his owne gore.
Else shall thy louing Lord thee see no more,
And eke thy selfe of honour, which thou didst atchiue.
Prouidence heauenly passeth liuing thought,
For loe great grace or fortune thither brought
In those same woods, ye well remember may,
She, that base _Braggadochio_ did affray,
_Belph{oe}be_ was her name, as faire as _Ph{oe}bus_ sunne.
She on a day, as she pursewd the chace
She wounded had, the same along did trace
To haue besprinckled all the grassy greene;
Well hoped she the beast engor'd had beene,
But ah, her expectation greatly was deceau'd.
Shortly she came, whereas that woefull Squire
In whose faire eyes, like lamps of quenched fire,
His locks, like faded leaues fallen to grownd,
And his sweete lips, on which before that stownd
Spoild of their rosie red, were woxen pale and wan.
Saw neuer liuing eye more heauy sight,
Or riue in twaine: which when that Lady bright
All suddeinly abasht she chaunged hew,
But when she +better+ him beheld, she grew
The point of pitty perced through her tender hart.
Meekely she bowed downe, to weete if life
And feeling by his pulses beating rife,
She cast to comfort him with busie paine:
And rubd his temples, and each trembling vaine;
And from his head his heauy burganet did +light.+
Into the woods thenceforth in hast she went,
For she of hearbes had great intendiment,
Her +nourced+ had in trew Nobility:
Or _Panach{ae}a_, or _Polygony_,
Who al this while lay bleeding out his hart-bloud neare.
peopled all parts of nature: the seas, springs, rivers, grottoes,
trees, mountains)
Raleigh; "diuine" because it was held to have magical properties)
alternative spelling, "panacea", which has a different
derivation)
powdered root, when directly applied to a wound, will stop the
bleeding)
The soueraigne weede betwixt two marbles plaine
And then atweene her lilly handes twaine,
And round about, as she could well it vze,
T'abate all spasme, and soke the swelling bruze,
She with her scarfe did bind the wound from cold to keepe.
"leaches craft")
_intundere_, to bruise; this meaning is given in _OED_ and by
other editors but makes less contextual sense)
By this he had sweet life recur'd againe,
His watry eyes, drizling like deawy raine,
From whence descend all hopelesse remedies:
The goodly Mayd full of diuinities,
Her bow and gilden quiuer lying him beside.
Mercy deare Lord (said he) what grace is this,
To send thine Angell from her bowre of blis,
Angell, or Goddesse do I call thee right?
That hast from darkenesse me returnd to light,
Hast drest my sinfull wounds?  I kisse thy blessed feete.
not accidental: see 305.39-40, and cf. 205.30-1, 212.58 ff.)
Thereat she blushing said, Ah gentle Squire,
And daughter of a woody Nymphe, desire
Which if thou gaine, I shalbe well apayd.
To commun accidents still open layd,
To succour wretched wights, whom we captiued see.
By this her Damzels, which the former chace
As +did+ _Belph{oe}be_, in the bloudy place,
Of life, whom late their Ladies arrow ryu'd:
And euery one to runne the swiftest stryu'd;
And where their Lady was, arriued at the last.
Where when they saw that goodly boy, with blood
They wondred much, and shortly vnderstood,
And reskewed out of the heauy stownd.
Farre in the woods, whiles that he lay in swownd,
They did him set thereon, and +forth with+ them conuayd.
Into that forest farre they thence him led,
With mountaines round about enuironed,
And like a stately Theatre it made,
And in the midst a little riuer plaide
With gentle murmure, that his course they did restraine.
Beside the same a dainty place there lay,
In which the birds song many a louely lay
As it an earthly Paradize had beene:
A faire Pauilion, scarcely to be seene,
That greatest Princes +liuing+ it mote well delight.
emblem of love; the laurel is sacred to Phoebus Apollo (see
on the etymology of whose name see 305.27:9)
Thither they brought that wounded Squire, and layd
He rested him a while, and then the Mayd
Dayly she dressed him, and did the best
That shortly she his dolour hath redrest,
It she reduced, but himselfe destroyed quight.
now better placed to be tended)
O foolish Physick, and vnfruitfull paine,
She his hurt thigh to him recur'd againe,
Through an vnwary dart, which did rebound
What bootes it him from death to be vnbound,
Of sorrow and despaire without aleggeaunce?
Still as his wound did gather, and grow hole,
Madnesse to saue a part, and lose the whole.
Whiles dayly plaisters to his wound she layd,
The whiles her matchlesse beautie him dismayd.
But loue so faire a Lady, that his life releast?
Long while he stroue in his courageous brest,
And loue for to dislodge out of his nest:
Her soueraigne bounty, and celestiall hew,
But when his meane estate he did +reuew+,
And of his lucklesse lot and cruell loue thus plaind.
Vnthankfull wretch (said he) is this the meed,
Thy life she saued by her gracious deed,
To blot her honour, and her heauenly light.
Deeme of her high desert, or seeme so light:
Dye rather, dy, then euer loue disloyally.
But if to loue disloyalty it bee,
Me brought? ah farre be such reproch fro mee.
Sith I her dew reward cannot restore:
Dying her serue, and liuing her adore;
Dye rather, dye, then euer from her seruice swerue.
But foolish boy, what bootes thy seruice bace
Thou a meane Squire, of meeke and lowly place,
How then? of all loue taketh equall vew:
The loue and seruice of the basest crew?
Dye rather, dye, then euer so faire loue forsake.
take as a model, pattern, or ideal)
Thus warreid he long time against his will,
To yield himselfe vnto the mighty ill:
His inward parts, and all his entrayles wast,
It left, but both did quite drye vp, and blast;
Of euery thing consumes, and calcineth by art.
desired}
Which seeing faire _Belph{oe}be_, gan to feare,
Or that the wicked steele empoysned were:
Yet still he wasted, as the snow congealed,
Yet neuer he his hart to her reuealed,
Then with dishonorable termes her to entreat.
She gracious Lady, yet no paines did spare,
Many Restoratiues of vertues rare,
To mitigate his stubborne mallady:
A loue-sick hart, she did to him enuy;
She did enuy that soueraigne salue, in secret store.
heart)
That dainty Rose, the daughter of her Morne,
The girlond of her honour did adorne:
Ne the sharp Northerne wind thereon to showre,
When so the froward skye began to lowre:
She did it faire dispred, and let +to+ florish faire.
regard}
Eternall God in his almighty powre,
In Paradize whilome did plant this flowre,
And did in stocke of earthly flesh enrace,
In gentle Ladies brest, and bounteous race
And beareth fruit of honour and all chast desire.
Faire ympes of beautie, whose bright shining beames
And to your willes both royalties and +Realmes+
With this faire flowre your goodly girlonds dight,
That shall embellish more your beautie bright,
Such as the Angels +weare+ before Gods tribunall.
England,_ reaume_, became reduced to_ reame, reme, reume_; the
present spelling became the standard form about 1600.  Cf.
To your faire selues a faire ensample frame,
To whom in perfect loue, and spotlesse fame
Ne poysnous Enuy iustly can empaire
For thy she standeth on the highest staire
That Ladies all may follow her ensample dead.
In so great prayse of stedfast chastity,
Tempred with grace, and goodly modesty,
The higher place in her Heroick mind:
And both encreast the prayse of woman kind,
So all did make in her a perfect complement.
_The birth of faire Belph{oe}be and
The Gardins of Adonis fraught
WEll may I weene, faire Ladies, all this while
So great perfections did in her compile,
So farre from court and royall Citadell,
Seemeth that such wild woods should far expell
And gentle sprite deforme with rude rusticity.
But to this faire _Belph{oe}be_ in her berth
Looking with myld aspect vpon the earth,
That all the gifts of grace and chastitee
_Ioue_ laught on _Venus_ from his soueraigne see,
And all the _Graces_ rockt her cradle being borne.
fruitfulness and plenty)
to be especially favourable)
handmaids of Venus.  They are especially associated with poetry)
Her berth was of the wombe of Morning dew,
And all her whole creation did her shew
That is ingenerate in fleshly slime.
So was she trayned vp from time to time,
Till to her dew perfection she was ripened.
Her mother was the faire _Chrysogonee_,
A Faerie was, yborne of high degree,
Faire _Amoretta_ in the second place:
The heritage of all celestiall grace.
Of bountie, and of beautie, and all vertues rare.
It were a goodly storie, to declare,
Conceiu'd these infants, and how she them bare,
After she had nine moneths fulfild and gone:
They were enwombed in the sacred throne
As other wemens babes, they sucked vitall blood.
But wondrously they were begot, and bred
As it in antique bookes is mentioned.
When _Titan_ faire +his beames+ did display,
She bath'd her brest, the boyling heat t'allay;
And all the sweetest flowres, that in the forrest grew.
the stars of an ethereal fluid affecting men's characters and
destiny.  Derived from the Latin _influentem_, via French
_influence_}
Till faint through irkesome wearinesse, adowne
To sleepe, the whiles a gentle slombring swowne
The sunne-beames bright vpon her body playd,
And pierst into her wombe, where they embayd
That in her pregnant flesh they shortly fructifide.
ship), were shut in}
motion takes place, hence: intention, purpose (after French
_sens_)}
Miraculous may seeme to him, that reades
But reason teacheth that the fruitfull seades
Of the sunbeames in moyst complexion,
So after _Nilus_ invndation,
Informed in the mud, on which the Sunne hath shynd.
"dry".  The "humours", in medieval physiology, were the four
chief fluids of the body: blood, phlegm, choler and melancholy.
A person's temperament was said to be determined by the relative
proportions of these four cardinal humours)
Great father he of generation
And his faire sister for creation
With heate and humour, breedes the liuing wight.
Yet wist she nought thereof, but sore affright,
Which still increast, till she her terme had full outgone.
Phoebus Apollo)
for this account of spontaneous generation is _Met._ 1.416-37)
pretations seem possible: (1) "Yet knew she nothing thereof, but,
sorely terrified," in which case "Wondered" at the start of line
sore terror," giving "Wondered" the meaning "Filled with wonder")
Whereof conceiuing shame and foule disgrace,
She fled into the wildernesse a space,
And shund dishonor, which as death she feard:
Her selfe she set, and comfortably cheard;
And seized euery sense with sorrow sore opprest.
It fortuned, faire _Venus_ hauing lost
Who for some light displeasure, which him crost,
And left her blisfull bowre of ioy aboue,
When she for ought him sharpely did reproue,
Disguiz'd in thousand shapes, that none might him bewray.)
Him for to seeke, she left her heauenly hous,
Whence all the world deriues the glorious
With which high God his workmanship hath deckt;
Had borne him, or his tract she mote detect:
Vnto the man, that of him tydings to her brings.
First she him sought in Court, where most he vsed
But many there she found, which sore accused
His cruell deedes and wicked wyles did spot:
Complayning, how with his empoysned shot
And so had left them languishing twixt hope and feare.
She then the Citties sought from gate to gate,
And euery one her answerd, that too late
Of his sharpe darts and whot artillerie;
Of his mischieuous deedes, and said, That hee
The enimy of peace, and author of all strife.
Then in the countrey she abroad him sought,
Where also many plaints to her were brought,
And his false venim through their veines inspyred;
Keeping their fleecie flockes, as they were hyred,
Her sonne had to them doen; yet she did smile thereat.
But when in none of all these she him got,
At last she her bethought, that she had not
In which full many louely Nymphes abyde,
Or that the loue of some of them him tyde:
To search the secret haunts of _Dianes_ company.
all parts of nature)
Shortly vnto the wastefull woods she came,
After late chace of their embrewed game,
Some of them washing with the liquid dew
And soyle which did deforme their liuely hew;
The rest vpon her person gaue attendance great.
men, hence:_ armed retinue
She hauing hong vpon a bough on high
Her siluer buskins from her nimble thigh,
After her heat the breathing cold to taste;
Embreaded were for hindring of her haste,
And were with sweet _Ambrosia_ all besprinckled light.
because she is also goddess of the moon)
oneself for action)
armour, etc.)
Gerard remarks that "The fragrant smell that this kinde of
_Ambrosia_ or Oke of Cappadocia yeeldeth, hath mooved the Poets
to suppose that this herbe was meate and foode for the gods."
The "Oak of Cappadocia" is a plant of the daisy family.  Perhaps
we are simply to take it that Diana's hair, after the chase, is
left sprinkled with perfumed fragments of leaves and flowers)
Soone as she _Venus_ saw behind her backe,
And woxe halfe wroth against her damzels slacke,
But suffred her so carelesly disguized
Vpgath'ring, in her bosome she comprized,
Whiles all her Nymphes did like a girlond her enclose.
customary or considered appropriate}
Goodly she gan faire _Cytherea_ greet,
Into that wildernesse for her vnmeet,
That suddein change she strange aduenture thought.
That she her dearest sonne _Cupido_ sought,
That she repented sore, to haue him angered.
shows)
(Cerigo), off which it is said she first rose from the foam of
the sea)
Thereat _Diana_ gan to smile, in scorne
Great pittie sure, that ye be so forlorne
To your disports: ill mote ye bene apayd.
Faire sister, ill beseemes it to vpbrayd
The like that mine, may be your paine another tide.
be satisfied
As you in woods and wanton wildernesse
So my delight is all in ioyfulnesse,
And ill becomes you with your loftie creasts,
We both are bound to follow heauens beheasts,
Spare, gentle sister, with reproch my paine to eeke.
"superior ways"}
And tell me, if that ye my sonne haue heard,
Or keepe their cabins: much I am affeard,
And turne his arrowes to their exercize:
For he is faire and fresh in face and guize,
So saying euery Nymph full narrowly she eyde.
arrows' usual exercise, so exciting love among the nymphs)
But _Ph{oe}be_ therewith sore was angered,
Where you him lately left, in _Mars_ his bed;
Ne lend we leisure to his idle toy:
By _Stygian_ lake I vow, whose sad annoy
Ile clip his wanton wings, that he no more shall fly.
which Charon ferries the souls of the departed, and by which the
gods, as here, swear their most solemn oaths: cf. _Aen._ 6.324-5)
profuse in growth}
Whom when as _Venus_ saw so sore displeased,
What she had said: so her she soone appeased,
+Which as+ a fountaine from her sweet lips went,
She was well pleasd, and forth her damzels sent,
If any tract of him or tydings they mote trace.
"repent")
To search the God of loue, her Nymphes she sent
And after them her selfe eke with her went
So long they sought, till they arriued were
Faire _Crysogone_ in slombry traunce whilere:
Vnwares had borne two babes, as faire as springing day.
Vnwares she them conceiu'd, vnwares she bore:
Withouten pleasure: ne her need implore
They were through wonder nigh of sense bereaued,
At last they both agreed, her seeming grieued
But from her louing side the tender babes to take.
or Diana)
Vp they them tooke, each one a babe vptooke,
Dame +_Ph{ae}be_+ to a Nymph her babe betooke,
And of her selfe her name _Belph{oe}be_ red:
To be vpbrought in goodly womanhed,
Her _Amoretta_ cald, to comfort her dismayd.
She brought her to her ioyous Paradize,
So faire a place, as Nature can deuize:
Or it in +_Gnidus_+ be, I wote not well;
All other pleasant places doth excell,
The _Gardin_ of _Adonis_, farre renowmd by fame.
according to some legends, Aphrodite (Venus) is said to have come
ashore after her birth in the waves.  Centre of her worship, with
an important temple dedicated to her: its high priest exercised
religious authority over the whole island.  In other traditions
she is said to have arisen from the sea off Cythera (Cerigo), and
is thus sometimes, as at 306.20:1, called Cytherea.  "Cytheron
hill" follows _DGDG_ 3.22 and _Knight's Tale_ 1936-7 (noted
Church (1758)))
to Aphrodite containing a famous statue of her by Praxiteles)
In that same Gardin all the goodly flowres,
And decks the girlonds of her paramoures,
Of all things, that are borne to liue and die,
Here to account the endlesse progenie
But so much as doth need, must needs be counted here.
It sited was in fruitfull soyle of old,
The one of yron, the other of bright gold,
And double gates it had, which opened wide,
Th'one faire and fresh, the other old and dride:
Old _Genius_, the which a double nature has.
He letteth in, he letteth out to wend,
A thousand thousand naked babes attend
That he with fleshly weedes would them attire:
Ordained hath, he clothes with sinfull mire,
Till they againe returne backe by the hinder gate.
stanza 31, i.e. the gate which is "old and dride")
After that they againe returned beene,
And grow +afresh+, as they had neuer seene
Some thousand yeares so doen they there +remaine+;
Or sent into the chaungefull world againe,
So like a wheele around they runne from old to new.
explanations, see Hamilton (1980))
Ne needs there Gardiner to set, or sow,
All things, as they created were, doe grow,
Which first was spoken by th'Almightie lord,
Ne doe they need with water of the ford,
For in themselues eternall moisture they imply.
Infinite shapes of creatures there are bred,
And euery sort is in a sundry bed
Some fit for reasonable soules t'indew,
And all the fruitfull spawne of fishes hew
That seem'd the _Ocean_ could not containe them there.
Daily they grow, and daily forth are sent
Yet is the stocke not lessened, nor spent,
As it at first created was of yore.
In hatefull darkenesse and in deepe horrore,
The substances of natures fruitfull progenyes.
cosmogonies, existed before the creation of the world.  Chaos was
called the mother of Erebus (Darkness) and Nox (Night).  Cf. _RR_
All things from thence doe their first being fetch,
Which when as forme and feature it does ketch,
The state of life, out of the griesly shade.
Ne when the life decayes, and forme does fade,
But chaunged is, and often altred to and fro.
The substance is not chaunged, nor altered,
For euery substance is conditioned
Meet for her temper and complexion:
By course of kind, and by occasion;
As doth the lilly fresh before the sunny ray.
bodily "humours"}
Great enimy to it, and +to+ all the rest,
Is wicked _Time_, who with his scyth addrest,
And all their glory to the ground downe flings,
He flyes about, and with his flaggy wings
Ne euer pittie may relent his malice hard.
Yet pittie often did the gods relent,
And their great mother _Venus_ did lament
Her hart was pierst with pittie at the sight,
Yet no'te she find redresse for such despight.
All things decay in time, and to their end do draw.
But were it not, that _Time_ their troubler is,
Should happie be, and haue immortall blis:
And sweet loue gentle fits emongst them throwes,
Franckly each paramour his leman knowes,
Their goodly meriment, and gay felicitie.
There is continuall spring, and haruest there
For both the boughes doe laughing blossomes beare,
And eke attonce the +heauy+ trees they clime,
The whiles the ioyous birdes make their pastime
And their true loues without suspition tell abrode.
in the garden, or just to the birds.  Most likely it is redundant
(i.e. it is the trees which climb), the word being included only
for the sake of the metre)
Right in the middest of that Paradise,
A gloomy groue of mirtle trees did rise,
Nor wicked beasts their tender buds did crop,
And from their fruitfull sides sweet gum did drop,
Threw forth most dainty odours, and most sweet delight.
precious dew bedight, Threw forth ..." and (2) "That all the
And in the thickest couert of that shade,
But of the trees owne inclination made,
With wanton yuie twyne entrayld athwart,
Fashiond aboue within their inmost part,
Nor _Aeolus_ sharp blast could worke them any wrong.
And all about grew euery sort of flowre,
Fresh _Hyacinthus_, _Ph{oe}bus_ paramoure,
Foolish _Narcisse_, that likes the watry shore,
Sad _Amaranthus_, in whose purple gore
To whom sweet Poets verse hath giuen endlesse date.
youth Hyacinth, son of the Spartan king Amyclas.  Hyacinth
received the attentions of Apollo and Zephyr, god of the west
wind; Zephyr's interest was not reciprocated.  One day, when
Apollo and Hyacinth were playing at quoits, the jealous Zephyr
caused one of Apollo's quoits to drift in flight and strike
Hyacinth on the head, killing him instantly.  See _Met._ 10.162-
reflection in a pool that he gradually pined away and was
metamorphosed into a flower; see _Met._ 3.339-510, _DGDG_ 4.9-10,
unfading); cf. _PL_ 3.353.  The name is applied to the genus
_Amaranthus_, with coloured foliage, which includes Love-lies-
bleeding, _A. caudatus_)
Clarinda", probably by Sidney's sister, Mary, Countess of
Pembroke, and other elegies to Sidney)
There wont faire _Venus_ often to enioy
And reape sweet pleasure of the wanton boy;
Lapped in flowres and pretious spycery,
Of _Stygian_ Gods, which doe her loue enuy;
Possesseth him, and of his sweetnesse takes her fill.
hell, over which Charon ferries the souls of the departed; used
also as a synonym for "infernal", "hellish"}
And sooth it seemes they say: for he may not
In balefull night, where all things are forgot;
Yet is eterne in mutabilitie,
Transformed oft, and chaunged diuerslie:
Therefore needs mote he liue, that liuing giues to all.
There now he liueth in eternall blis,
Ne feareth he henceforth that foe of his,
For that wilde Bore, the which him once annoyd,
That her sweet loue his malice mote auoyd,
Hewen vnderneath that Mount, that none him +losen+ may.
wearied (consonant with the allegorical import of Adonis's death)
There now he liues in euerlasting ioy,
Which thither haunt, and with the winged boy
Who when he hath with spoiles and cruelty
Of many wretches set his triumphes hye,
Aside, with faire _Adonis_ playes his wanton parts.
meaning a hymn to Bacchus, the god of wine, associated with
madness and frenzy.  Bacchus compelled the women of Thebes to
celebrate festivals to him on Mount Cytheron (see 306.29:4);
perhaps this connexion was in Spenser's mind)
And his true loue faire _Psyche_ with him playes,
After long troubles and vnmeet vpbrayes,
And eke himselfe her cruelly exyld:
She with him liues, and hath him borne a chyld,
_Pleasure_, the daughter of _Cupid_ and _Psyche_ late.
Ass_ by Apuleius)
pleasure)
(qualifying "daughter")
Hither great _Venus_ brought this infant faire,
And vnto _Psyche_ with great trust and care
And trained vp in true feminitee:
Then her owne daughter _Pleasure_, to whom shee
In all the lore of loue, and goodly womanhead.
In which when she to perfect ripenesse grew,
She brought her forth into the worldes vew,
And Lodestarre of all chaste affectione,
To Faery court she came, where many one
His feeble hart wide +launched+ with loues cruell wound.
But she to none of them her loue did cast,
To whom her louing hart she linked fast
And for his dearest sake endured sore,
Who her would forced haue to haue forlore
As ye may elsewhere read that ruefull history.
But well I weene, ye first desire to learne,
Which fled so fast from that same foster stearne,
That was to weet, the goodly _Florimell_;
Her louer deare, her dearest _Marinell_,
And from Prince _Arthur_ fled with wings of idle feare.
_The witches sonne loues Florimell:
Satyrane saues the Squire of Dames
LIke as an Hynd forth singled from the heard,
Yet flyes away of her owne feet affeard,
Murmure of winde, her terror hath encreast;
Long after she from perill was releast:
Did seeme to be the same, which she escapt whyleare.
All that same euening she in flying spent,
Ne did she let dull sleepe once to relent,
Euer alike, as if her former dred
And her white Palfrey hauing conquered
Perforce her carried, where euer he thought best.
So long as breath, and hable puissance
His pace he freshly forward did aduaunce,
But nought that wanteth rest, can long aby.
His force, at last perforce a downe did ly,
Thereat was suddein strooke with great astonishment.
And forst t'alight, on foot mote algates fare,
Need teacheth her this lesson hard and rare,
And mortall miseries doth make her play.
To an hilles side, which did to her bewray
All couerd with thick woods, that quite it ouercame.
Through +the tops+ of the high trees she did descry
Reeking aloft, vprolled to the sky:
That in the same did wonne some liuing wight.
And came at last in weary wretched plight
To find some refuge there, and rest her weary syde.
There in a gloomy hollow glen she found
In homely wize, and wald with sods around,
And wilfull want, all carelesse of her needes;
Far from all neighbours, that her deuilish deedes
And hurt far off vnknowne, whom euer she enuide.
The Damzell there arriuing entred in;
Busie (as seem'd) about some wicked gin:
Lightly vpstarted from the dustie ground,
Stared on her awhile, as one astound,
But shewd by outward signes, that dread her sence did daze.
sight}
At last turning her feare to foolish wrath,
And who she was, and what vnwonted path
To which the Damzell full of doubtfull thought,
With silly Virgin by aduenture brought
That craue but rowme to rest, while tempest ouerblo'th.
With that adowne out of her Christall eyne
That like +two+ Orient pearles, did purely shyne
She sighed soft, that none so bestiall,
Would make to melt, or pitteously appall;
In mischiefe, was much moued at so pitteous sight.
this word should be removed from the Shadow Text)
lustre; brilliant, lustrous, sparkling)
And gan recomfort her in her rude wyse,
Wiping the teares from her suffused eyes,
And wearie limbes a while.  She nothing quaint
Sith brought she was now to so hard constraint,
As glad of that small rest, as Bird of tempest gon.
Tho gan she gather vp her garments rent,
With golden wreath and gorgeous ornament;
She was astonisht at her heauenly hew,
But or some Goddesse, or of _Dianes_ crew,
T'adore thing so diuine as beauty, were but right.
This wicked woman had a wicked sonne,
A laesie loord, for nothing good to donne,
Ne euer cast his mind to couet prayse,
But all the day before the sunny rayes
Such laesinesse both lewd and poore attonce him made.
interpretation, see _SC_, gloss to "Julye".  The spelling "loord"
may also be intended to connote "lord")
deeds)
He comming home at vndertime, there found
Sitting beside his mother on the ground;
And his base thought with terrour and with aw
On the bright Sunne vnwares, doth soone withdraw
So stared he on her, and stood long while amazed.
the afternoon or evening.  Hamilton (1980) suggests that "noon"
makes good contextual sense, since the witch's son finds
Florimell as dazzling as "the bright Sunne"}
"Februarie"); _also, on a second reading of Cantos vii and viii:_
awaken (cognate with "dawn") _whence:_ arouse (i.e. sexually.
"Daw" (aphetic for "jackdaw") in early Scottish and northern
dialect also means "simpleton" (cf. _Hubberd_ 913); thus Spenser
might have intended that the verb "to adaw" should also connote
"to dumbfound")
Softly at last he gan his mother aske,
That in so straunge disguizement there did maske,
But she, as one nigh of her wits depriued,
Like to a ghost, that lately is reuiued
So both at her, and each at other wondered.
sort)
considered customary}
supernatural)
river across which dead souls must pass.  See _Aen._ 6.312 ff.}
But the faire Virgin was so meeke and mild,
Her goodly port, and to their senses vild,
She grew familiare in that desert place.
And curteise vse conceiu'd affection bace,
No loue, but brutish lust, that was so beastly tind.
Closely the wicked flame his bowels brent,
Yet had he not the hart, nor hardiment,
His caytiue thought durst not so high aspire,
He ween'd that his affection entire
To her he made, and many kind remembraunces.
compliments)
Oft from the forrest wildings he did bring,
And oft young birds, which he had taught to sing
Girlonds of flowres sometimes for her faire hed
He brought to her in bands, as conquered
All which, she of him tooke with countenance meeke and mild.
But past awhile, when she fit season saw
In secret wize her selfe thence to withdraw,
Might +by+ the witch or +by+ her sonne compast:
Now well recouered after long repast,
His late miswandred wayes now to remeasure right.
understood before _compast
And earely ere the dawning day appeard,
She went in perill, of each noyse affeard,
For still she feared to be ouerhent,
Who when too late awaking, well they kent,
To make exceeding mone, as they had bene vndonne.
But that lewd louer did the most lament
He knockt his brest with desperate intent,
His rugged flesh, and rent his ragged heare:
Was greatly woe begon, and gan to feare,
And loue to frenzy turnd, sith loue is franticke hight.
All wayes she sought, him to restore to plight,
But tears, nor charms, nor herbs, nor counsell might
So strong is passion, that no reason heares.
She turnd her selfe backe to her wicked leares
To bring her backe againe, or worke her finall bale.
cf. 106.48:7, 109.51:8)
Eftsoones out of her hidden caue she cald
That could the stoutest courage haue appald;
With thousand spots of colours queint elect,
Like neuer yet did liuing eye detect;
That feeds on womens flesh, as others feede on gras.
"quaint" is adj.)
It forth she cald, and gaue it streight in charge,
Ne once to stay to rest, or breath at large,
Or quite deuourd her beauties scornefull grace.
Went forth in hast, and did her footing trace
And passing speede, that shortly he her ouerhent.
Whom when the fearefull Damzell nigh espide,
That vgly shape so sore her terrifide,
And her flit Palfrey did so well apply
That whilest his breath did strength to him supply,
But when his force gan faile, his pace gan wex areare.
Which whenas she perceiu'd, she was dismayd
And of her safetie greatly grew afrayd;
As it befell, that she could flie no more,
Lightly she leaped, as a wight forlore,
And to her feet betooke her doubtfull sickernesse.
Not halfe so fast the wicked _Myrrha_ fled
Nor halfe so fast to saue her maidenhed,
As _Florimell_ fled from that Monster yond,
For in the sea to drowne her selfe she fond,
Thereto feare gaue her wings, and neede her courage taught.
transformation into a tree: see _Met._ 10.312 ff.)
Thessaly, the largest division of Greece, which is bounded on the
east by the Aegean Sea)
fained: was eager, desired
It fortuned (high God did so ordaine)
In minde to leape into the mighty maine,
In which there slept a fisher old and pore,
Into the same she leapt, and with the ore
So safetie found at sea, which she found not at land.
waves}
The Monster ready on the pray to sease,
Ne durst assay to wade the perlous seas,
At last in vaine was forst to turne his flight,
Yet to auenge his deuilish despight,
And slew him cruelly, ere any reskew came.
And after hauing him embowelled,
To passe that way, as forth he trauelled;
As euer man that bloudy field did fight;
And courtly seruices tooke no delight,
For both to be and seeme to him was labour lich.
It was to weete the good Sir _Satyrane_,
As was his wont in forrest, and in plaine;
As in the smoky forge it was compilde,
He comming present, where the Monster vilde
Vnto his reskew ran, and greedily him sped.
like below, usually portrayed as more or less lustful.  In Roman
mythology, Satyr, one of the satyrs, is a companion of Bacchus
with long, pointed ears, behind which are the stumps of horns,
with the tail of a goat, bristly hair, and a flat nose.  See
There well perceiu'd he, that it was the horse,
That of that feend was rent without remorse:
To that faire Mayd, the flowre of womens pride;
His famous conquests highly magnifide:
From her in flight, he found, that did him sore apall.
Full of sad feare, and doubtfull agony,
And with huge strokes, and cruell battery
Him selfe from deadly daunger to defend:
He did engraue, and muchell bloud did spend,
And fierce he still appeard, the more he did him thresh.
He wist not, how him to despoile of life,
Sith him he saw still stronger grow through strife,
Greatly he grew enrag'd, and furiously
Vpon the beast, that with great cruelty
Yet he perforce him held, and strokes vpon him hept.
allegory:_ weakness of character, moral frailty
As he that striues to stop a suddein flood,
Forceth it swell aboue his wonted mood,
That all the countrey seemes to be a Maine,
The wofull husbandman doth lowd complaine,
For which to God he made so many an idle boone.
So him he held, and did through might amate:
That at the last his fiercenesse gan abate,
Who to auenge the implacable wrong,
Sought by all meanes his dolour to prolong,
His maker with her charmes had framed him so well.
The golden ribband, which that virgin wore
And with it bound the beast, that lowd did rore
Yet dared not his victour to withstand,
And all the way him followd on the strand,
Yet neuer learned he such seruice, till that day.
Thus as he led the Beast along the way,
Fast flying on a Courser dapled gray,
Her hard pursewd, and sought for to suppresse;
Lying athwart her horse in great distresse,
Whom she did meane to make the thrall of her desire.
Which whenas _Satyrane_ beheld, in hast
And crost the nearest way, by which he cast
But she the way shund nathemore for thy,
His mighty speare he couched warily,
Her selfe to fight addrest, and threw her lode aside.
alter her course because of that)
for attack}
Like as a Goshauke, that in foote doth beare
An Egle, that with plumy wings doth sheare
The quarrey throwes to ground with fell despight,
So ran the Geauntesse vnto the fight;
And with blasphemous bannes high God in peeces tare.
prey
She caught in hand an huge great yron mace,
But ere the stroke could seize his aymed place,
Yet nathemore the steele a sunder riued,
Ne her out of the stedfast sadle driued,
In thousand shiuers, and so forth beside her past.
Her Steed did stagger with that puissaunt strooke;
Then it had lighted on an aged Oke;
Vpon the top of Mount _Olympus_ hight,
With burning charet wheeles it nigh to smite:
And is the spectacle of ruinous decay.
the Olympic Games appears also in Sidney's _Apology for Poetry_;
but Spenser may have been misled by the obscure language of the
_Mythologiae_ of Natales Comes (5.1)": Maclean (1982) 286)
Yet therewith sore enrag'd, with sterne regard
Which on his helmet martelled so hard,
And bowd his battred visour to his brest:
But reeled to and fro from East to West:
She lightly vnto him adioyned side to syde;
And on his collar laying puissant hand,
Perforse him pluckt, vnable to withstand,
In loathly wise like to a carion corse,
That her pursewed, +saw+ with great +remorse,+
And gan encrease his speed, as she encreast her flight.
Whom when as nigh approching she espyde,
For she list not the battell to abide,
Yet her the hardy knight pursewd so nye,
But still when him at hand she did espy,
But when he stayd, to flight againe she did her take.
By this +the+ good Sir _Satyrane_ gan +wake+
And seeing none in place, he gan to make
Which reft +from him+ so faire a cheuisaunce:
Whom he had reskewed from captiuaunce
Vnable to arise, or foot or hand to styre.
To whom approching, well he mote perceiue
And louely face, made fit for to deceiue
Now in the blossome of his freshest age:
And after gan inquire his parentage,
And who that was, which chaced her along the lands.
Then trembling yet through feare, the Squire bespake,
A daughter of the _Titans_ which did make
To scale the skyes, and put _Ioue_ from his right:
And drunke with bloud of men, slaine by his might,
Whilome begot, being but halfe twin of that berth.
(_argos_, shining, glistening, is also applied in classical Greek
to the legs of running dogs, as rapid motion is said to cause a
flickering light.  Argante is described as "fast flying" at
natively, the name might be derived from that of Arges, one of
the Titans)
Pelion in order to scale Mount Olympus and dethrone Jupiter
(_Met._ 1.151 ff.))
who was in turn the son of Ge and Aether (Sky))
For at that berth another Babe she bore,
Great wreake to many errant knights of yore,
These twinnes, men say, (a thing far passing thought)
Ere they into the lightsome world were brought,
And in that monstrous wise did to the world appere.
change distances Ollyphant from Chaucer's tale (see Glossary),
which actually breaks off before Olifaunt is killed; and Spenser
recalls that his Ollyphant features later in the story (311.3
ff.)_
_Tale of Sir Thopas_ 7.807-9)
the word-order here also implies the sense of erring, deviating,
etc.)
So liu'd they euer after in like sin,
But greatest shame was to that maiden twin,
Her natiue flesh, and +staine+ her brothers bowre,
And suffred beasts her body to deflowre:
Yet all that might not slake her sensuall desyre.
But ouer all the countrey she did raunge,
And feed her fancy with delightfull chaunge:
Through her maine strength, in which she most doth trust,
Where in eternall bondage dye he must,
And in all shamefull sort him selfe with her defile.
Me seely wretch she so at vauntage caught,
And meant vnto her prison to haue brought,
That thousand deathes me leuer were to dye,
I plighted haue, and yet keepe stedfastly:
Call me the _Squyre of Dames_ that me beseemeth well.
But that bold knight, whom ye pursuing saw
But a faire virgin, that in martiall law,
And aboue many knights is eke esteemed,
She you from death, you me from dread redeemed.
But she, or such as she, that is so chaste a wight.
the Greek goddess of wisdom, Minerva in Roman mythology.  She is
represented as a virgin divinity, immune to sexual love)
Her well beseemes that Quest (quoth _Satyrane_)
Which thou vpon thy selfe hast lately ta'ne?
So be ye pleasd to pardon all amis.
After long suit and weary seruicis,
And how she might be sure, that I would neuer swerue.
I glad by any meanes her grace to gaine,
Eftsoones she bad me, with incessaunt paine
And euery where, where with my power or skill
That I the same should faithfully fulfill,
And pledges; as the spoiles of my victorious games.
copulate with
So well I to faire Ladies seruice did,
That ere the yeare his course had compassid,
And thrise three hundred thanks for my good partes
Which when she saw, more bent to eke my smartes,
She gan for me deuise a grieuous punishment.
(as 202.37:5)
To weet, that I my trauell should resume,
Ne euer to her presence should presume,
The which, for all the suit I could propound,
But did abide for euer chast and sound.
How many foundst thou such to put in thy record?
In deed Sir knight (said he) one word may tell
For onely three they were disposd so well,
To find them out.  Mote I (then laughing sayd
The which thy proffred curtesie denayd?
Or brutishly brought vp, that neu'r did fashions see.
The first which then refused me (said hee)
Yet flat refusd to haue a do with mee,
(Thereat full hartely laughed _Satyrane_)
Which would not let me be her Chappellane,
Her counsell, if she should her trust in me repose.
The third a Damzell was of low degree,
Full little weened I, that chastitee
Yet was she faire, and in her +countenance+
Long thus I woo'd her with dew obseruance,
But was as farre at last, as when I first begon.
way of life
Safe her, I neuer any woman found,
But were for other causes firme and sound;
Or else for feare of shame and fowle disgrace.
My Ladies loue, in such a desperate case,
Seeking to match the chaste with th'vnchaste Ladies traine.
Perdy, (said _Satyrane_) thou _Squire of Dames_,
To get small thankes, and therewith many blames,
Thence backe returning to the former land,
He found him not; for he had broke his band,
To tell what tydings of faire _Florimell_ became.
what happened to Florimell)
_The Witch creates a snowy Lady,
Who wrongd by Carle by Proteus sau'd,
form)
SO oft as I this history record,
To thinke, how causelesse of her owne accord
Should plonged be in such affliction,
That sure I weene, the hardest hart of stone,
For misery craues rather mercie, then repriefe.
But that accursed Hag, her hostesse late,
That she desyrd th'abridgement of her fate,
Now when the Beast, which by her wicked art
Tyde with her +broken+ girdle, it a part
She weend, and wondrous gladnesse to her hart applyde.
and is also an intensive)
spoils")
And with it running hast'ly to her sonne,
Who thereby deeming sure the thing as donne,
Much more then earst, and would haue algates riued
He surely dempt, himselfe he thought depriued
His foolish maladie, and long time had misled.
With thought whereof, exceeding mad he grew,
Had she not fled into a secret mew,
The +maisters+ of her art: there was she faine
And them coniure vpon eternall paine,
How she might heale her sonne, whose senses were decayd.
girdle)
By their +aduise+, and her owne wicked wit,
Whose like on earth was neuer framed yit,
And grudg'd to see the counterfet should shame
To make another like the former Dame,
So liuely and so like, that many it mistooke.
convincing
The substance, whereof she the bodie made,
Which she had gathered in a shadie glade
By errant Sprights, but from all men conceald:
And virgin +wex+, that neuer yet was seald,
That like a liuely sanguine it seem'd to the eye.
Asiatic Russia}
of which all matter was said to be composed; also called
"spirit".  According to Paracelsus, mercury is one of three basic
components of man.  Mercury was also a symbol of sprightliness,
volatility, and inconstancy)
the manufacture of red sealing-wax: it is the ore from which most
of the world's mercury is derived}
associated with the "sanguine" complexion; cf. 306.8:5)
In stead of eyes two burning lampes she set
And a quicke mouing Spirit did arret
In stead of yellow lockes she did deuise,
Yet golden wyre was not so yellow thrise
Of life, she put a Spright to rule the carkasse dead.
A wicked Spright yfraught with fawning guile,
Which with the Prince of Darknesse fell +somewhile+,
Him needed not instruct, which way were best
Ne how to speake, ne how to vse his gest,
And all the wyles of wemens wits knew passing well.
Him shaped thus, she deckt in garments gay,
That who so then her saw, would surely say,
Or fairer then her selfe, if ought algate
Vnto her sonne, that lay in feeble state;
She was the Lady selfe, +whom+ he so long had sought.
Tho fast her clipping twixt his armes twaine,
And soone forgot his former sickly paine;
Coyly rebutted his embracement light;
Enough to hold a foole in vaine delight:
As her Creatresse had in charge to her ordained.
extreme pleasure
(qualifying "rebutted")
Till on a day, as he disposed was
Her to disport, and idle time to pas,
A knight that way there chaunced to repaire;
That deedes of armes had euer in despaire,
His glory did repose, and credit did maintaine.
He seeing with that Chorle so faire a wight,
Much merueiled thereat, as well he might,
His bloudie speare eftsoones he boldly bent
Fell streight to ground in great astonishment;
Dy, if thou it gainesay: I will away her beare.
occasioned by this}
The fearefull Chorle durst not gainesay, nor dooe,
Who finding litle leasure her to wooe,
And without reskew led her quite away.
And next to none, after that happie day,
The fairest wight on ground, and most of men esteemed.
But when he saw himselfe free from poursute,
With termes of loue and lewdnesse dissolute;
To such vaine vses, that him best became:
As seeming sory, that she euer came
To reaue her honor, which she more then life prefard.
Thus as they two of kindnesse treated long,
An armed knight, vpon a courser strong,
Seemed to thunder, and did nigh affray
And fain'd to cheare his Ladie in dismay;
And her to saue from outrage, meekely prayed him.
Fiercely that stranger forward came, and nigh
Bad that same boaster, as he mote, on high
Or bide him battell without further treat.
And fild his senses with abashment great;
He it dissembled well, and light seem'd to esteeme.
to the lord, king, or state}
Saying, Thou foolish knight, that weenst with words
And brought throgh points of many perilous swords:
Or proue thy selfe, this sad encounter shonne,
At those proud words that other knight begonne
To turne his steede about, or sure he should be ded.
other circumstances}
Sith then (said _Braggadocchio_) needes thou wilt
Turne we our steedes, that both in equall tilt
This said, they both a furlongs mountenance
But _Braggadocchio_ with his bloudie lance
But left his loue to losse, and fled himselfe apace.
The knight him seeing fly, had no regard
And hauing her from _Trompart_ lightly reard,
And with her fled away without abode.
It was, with whom in company he yode,
So made him thinke him selfe in heauen, that was in hell.
But _Florimell_ her selfe was farre away,
And taught the carefull Mariner to play,
The land for sea, at randon there to raunge:
Not satisfide so farre her to estraunge
Did heape on her new waues of weary wretchednesse.
For being fled into the fishers bote,
Long so she on the mightie maine did flote,
For th'aire was milde, and cleared was the skie,
From stirring vp their stormy enmitie,
But all the while the fisher did securely sleepe.
At last when droncke with drowsinesse, he woke,
He was dismayd, and thrise his breast he stroke,
But when he +saw+ that blazing beauties beame,
He marueild more, and thought he yet did dreame
Assotted had his sense, or dazed was his eie.
But when her well auizing, he perceiued
Great comfort of her presence he conceiued,
To gin awake, and stirre his frozen spright:
Ah (said she) father, I note read aright,
Yet am I glad that here I now in safety +am+.
But thou good man, sith farre in sea we bee,
That now no more we can the maine-land see,
Least worse on sea then vs on land befell.
And said, his boat the way could wisely tell:
To looke on her faire face, and marke her snowy skin.
The sight whereof in his congealed flesh,
That the drie withered stocke it gan refresh,
The driest wood is soonest burnt to dust.
Where ill became him, rashly would haue thrust,
And shamefully +reproued+ for his rudenesse fond.
But he, that neuer good nor maners knew,
Hard is to teach an old horse amble trew.
Broke into open fire and rage extreme,
Forcing to doe, that did him fowle misseeme:
Her garments gay with scales of fish, that all did fill.
The silly virgin stroue him to withstand,
She struggled strongly both with foot and hand,
And cride to heauen, from humane helpe exild.
Where be ye now, when she is nigh defild
Of falshood or of slouth, when most it may behoue.
But if that thou, Sir _Satyran_, didst weete,
How soone would yee assemble many a fleete,
Towres, Cities, Kingdomes ye would ruinate,
Ne ought your burning fury mote abate;
No liuing creature could his cruelty asswage.
Who Persists".  Possibly the intended hero of an unknown book of
_callidus_); "Hot", "Fiery", "Passionate" (Latin _calidus_.  The
latter meanings are the most appropriate here.  Sir Calidore is
the hero of Book VI)
But sith that none of all her knights is nye,
And soueraine fauour towards chastity,
So much high God doth innocence embrace.
And the wide sea importuned long space
Along the fomy waues driuing his finny droue.
etc., but here, seals}
_Proteus_ is Shepheard of the seas of yore,
An aged sire with head all +frory+ hore,
Who when those pittifull outcries he heard,
His charet swift in haste he thither steard,
Was drawne vpon the waues, that fomed him around.
metaphorical bonds, as of duty and obligation)
And comming to that Fishers wandring bote,
He therein saw that yrkesome sight, which smote
Into his hart attonce: streight did he hayle
Of which he now did very litle fayle,
Him bet so sore, that life and sense did much dismay.
course": cf. 206.10:2)
The whiles the pitteous Ladie vp did ryse,
And blubbred face with teares of her faire eyes:
To saue her selfe from that outrageous spoyle,
+Had her from so infamous fact assoyld,+
Downe in her lap she hid her face, and loudly shright.
fact assoyle, _conj. Church_
Her selfe not saued yet from daunger dred
Like as a fearefull Partridge, that is fled
And fals to ground, to seeke for succour theare,
With greedy iawes her readie for to teare;
Was _Florimell_, when _Proteus_ she did see +thereby+.
game)
But he endeuoured with speeches milde
Bidding her feare no more her foeman vilde,
Yet all that could not from affright her hold,
For her faint heart was with the frozen cold
And all her senses with abashment quite were quayld.
Her vp betwixt his rugged hands he reard,
Whiles the cold ysickles from his rough beard,
Yet he himselfe so busily addrest,
And out of that same fishers filthy nest
And there with many gentle termes her faire besought.
But that old leachour, which with bold assault
He cast to punish for his hainous fault;
And tyde behind his charet, to aggrate
So drag'd him through the waues in scornefull state,
But _Florimell_ with him vnto his bowre he bore.
His bowre is in the bottome of the maine,
The roaring billowes in their proud disdaine,
Therein is eaten out an hollow caue,
Had long while laboured it to engraue:
Saue one old _Nymph_, +hight+ _Panope_ to keepe it cleane.
peopled all parts of nature: the seas, springs, rivers, grottoes,
trees, mountains.  This one is a nereid, a sea-nymph}
her master's roof.  She reappears at 411.49:8, and see Hesiod,
_Theogony_ 250)
Thither he brought the sory _Florimell_,
And _Panope_ her entertaind eke well,
To winne her liking vnto his delight:
And offered faire gifts t'allure her sight,
Despysde, and all the fawning of the flatterer.
Daily he tempted her with this or that,
But euermore she him refused flat,
So firmely she had sealed vp her brest.
But she a mortall creature loued best:
But then she said she lou'd none, but a Faerie knight.
in the sense found at 308.15:1)
Then like a Faerie knight himselfe he drest;
Then like a king he was to her exprest,
To be his Leman and his Ladie trew:
With harder meanes he cast her to subdew,
So thinking for to make her stubborne courage quaile.
object, _hence:_ to prevail upon her
To dreadfull shapes he did himselfe transforme,
Then like a Centaure, then like to a storme,
Her will to win vnto his wished +end+.
He else could doe, he saw himselfe esteemd,
And threatned there to make her his eternall thrall.
and the lower parts of a horse}
Eternall thraldome was to her more liefe,
Die had she rather in tormenting griefe,
Or loosenesse, that she lightly did remoue.
And crowne of heauenly praise with Saints aboue,
Are still emongst them song, that far my rymes exceed.
Fit song of Angels caroled to bee;
Shall be t'aduance thy goodly chastitee,
In th'heart of euery honourable Dame,
And be partakers of thy endlesse fame.
To tell of _Satyrane_, where I him left of late.
Who hauing ended with that _Squire of Dames_
The which himselfe, then Ladies more defames,
With that same _Squire_, returned backe againe
They spyde a knight faire pricking on the plaine,
And in his port appeared manly hardiment.
becomingly (qualifying "pricking")
demeanour)
Sir _Satyrane_ him towards did addresse,
And comming nigh, eftsoones he gan to +gesse+
He bare, and by the colours in his crest,
And him saluting, as beseemed best,
And afterwardes, on what aduenture now he rode.
Satyrane, but not to us)
Who thereto answering, said; The tydings bad,
Which turned hath great mirth, to mourning sad,
And suddein parture of faire _Florimell_,
All the braue knights, that doen in armes excell,
Emongst the rest my lot (vnworthy) is to be one.
unusual)
Ah gentle knight (said then Sir _Satyrane_)
That hast a thanklesse seruice on thee ta'ne,
For dead, I +surely+ doubt, thou maist aread
That all the noble knights of _Maydenhead_,
And all faire Ladies may for euer sory be.
chivalric order of English knighthood, instituted c. 1344; the
sovereign (i.e. Elizabeth I, the Virgin Queen) is head of the
order)
Which words when _Paridell_ had heard, his hew
Then said, Faire Sir, how may I weene it trew,
Or speake ye of report, or did ye see
For perdie else how mote it euer bee,
Her noble bloud? the heauens such crueltie abhore.
These eyes did see, that they will euer rew
The Palfrey, whereon she did trauell, slew,
Which speaking token sheweth at the least
Besides, that more suspition encreast,
Distaynd with durt and bloud, as relique of the pray.
Aye me, (said _Paridell_) the signes be sad,
That Ladies safetie is sore to be drad:
Till triall doe more certaine truth bewray.
Ne long shall _Satyrane_ behind you stay,
My labour adde, and be partaker of their speed.
Ye noble knights (said then the _Squire of Dames_)
But sith the Sunne now ginnes to slake his beames,
And lose the teme out of his weary waine,
Your zealous hast, till morrow next againe
Which if ye please, to yonder castle turne your gate.
across the sky)
That counsell pleased well; so all yfere
Where soone arriuing, they restrained were
To errant knights be +commun+: wondrous sore
Gan them informe the cause, why that same dore
The which to let you weet, will further time require.
adventure; the word-order here also implies the sense of erring,
deviating)
_Malbecco will no straunge knights host,
Paridell giusts with Britomart:
REdoubted knights, and honorable Dames,
Right sore I feare, least with vnworthy blames
Or ought your goodly patience offend,
Which with her loose incontinence doth blend
And knighthood fowle defaced by a faithlesse knight.
But neuer let th'ensample of the bad
Of euill, may more notably be rad,
Ne all are shamed by the fault of one:
Emongst the Angels, a whole legione
What wonder then, if one of women all did mis?
Then listen Lordings, if ye list to weet
Mote not be entertaynd, as seemed meet,
Therein a cancred crabbed Carle does dwell,
Ne cares, what men say of him ill or well;
Yet has full large to liue, and spend at libertie.
But all his mind is set on mucky pelfe,
For which he others wrongs, and wreckes himselfe;
Whose beauty doth +her+ bounty far surpasse,
And also far vnlike conditions has;
And to be free from hard restraint and gealous feares.
mass; hence: treasure)
But he is old, and withered like hay,
The priuie guilt whereof makes him alway
Vpon her with his other blincked eye;
Approch to her, ne keepe her company,
Depriu'd of kindly ioy and naturall delight.
presence
_Malbecco_ he, and _Hellenore_ she hight,
That is the cause, why neuer any knight
Such, as no doubt of him he neede misdeeme.
Extremely mad the man I surely deeme,
A womans will, which is disposd to go astray.
wrong; _becco_, billy-goat, cuckold)
"over"; with possible pun on "whore".  She is named after Helen
of Troy: see 310.13:1)
In vaine he feares that, which he cannot shonne:
Can guilen _Argus_, when she list +misdonne+?
Nor brasen walls, nor many wakefull spyes,
But fast good will with gentle curtesyes,
May her perhaps containe, that else would algates fleet.
Then is he not more mad (said _Paridell_)
In dolefull thraldome all his dayes to dwell?
That loues his fetters, though they were of gold.
Whiles thus we suffer this same dotard old,
And rather do not ransack all, and him selfe kill?
Nay let vs first (said +_Satyrane_)+ entreat
And afterwardes affray with cruell threat,
Then if all fayle, we will by force it win,
As may be worthy of his haynous sin.
And to the Castle gate approcht in quiet wise.
Whereat soft knocking, entrance he desyrd.
Him answered, that all were now retyrd
Vnto their maister, who in bed was layd,
And therefore them of patience gently prayd.
And threatned him with force and punishment extreme.
prison; husband; yeoman}
the Latin _portarius_, etymologically distinct from the "porter"
who carries burdens)}
But all in vaine; for nought mote him relent,
They wayted, that the night was forward spent,
Gan blowen vp a bitter stormy blast,
That this faire many were compeld at last,
The which beside the gate for swine was ordered.
It fortuned, soone after they were gone,
Came to that Castle, and with earnest mone,
But like so as the rest he prayd for nought,
Sorely thereat he was displeasd, and thought
And euermore the Carle of curtesie accusd.
"late entrance")
But to auoyde th'intollerable stowre,
And to that shed, to shrowd him from the showre,
So as he was not let to enter there:
And swore, that he would lodge with them yfere,
And +so defide them+ each, and so defide them both.
would not be challenged)
Both were full loth to leaue that needfull tent,
Yet both full liefe him lodging to haue lent,
But chiefly _Paridell_ his hart did grate,
As if he did a dogge +to+ kenell rate,
Then when he was defide, in coward corner ly.
"loath", as at 309.13:8)
Tho hastily remounting to his steed,
Which in th'earthes hollow caues hath long bin hid,
Makes the huge element against her kind
Vntill that it an issew forth may find;
Confounds both land and seas, and skyes doth ouercast.
as 102.38:6, since it causes the skies to become overcast}
Their steel-hed speares they strongly coucht, and met
That with the terrour of their fierce affret,
That each awhile lay like a sencelesse corse.
Could not arise, the counterchaunge to scorse,
Then drew he his bright sword, and gan about him throw.
But _Satyrane_ forth stepping, did them stay
Then when they were accorded from the fray,
To heape on him dew vengeaunce for his hire.
To burne the same with vnquenchable fire,
To do fowle death to dye, or wrap in grieuous woe.
_Malbecco_ seeing them resolu'd in deed
For fire in earnest, ran with fearefull speed,
Besought them humbly, him to beare with all,
And slacke attendaunce vnto straungers call.
Though nought beleu'd, and entraunce late did not refuse.
They bene ybrought into a comely bowre,
Yet secretly their hoste did on them lowre,
But they dissembled, what they did not see,
Their garments wet, and weary armour free,
And eke their lately bruzed parts to bring in plight.
And eke that straunger knight emongst the +rest,+
Tho whenas vailed was her loftie crest,
Vpbounden, did them selues adowne display,
That in a cloud their light did long time stay,
And through the +persant+ aire shoote forth their +azure+ streames.
corruption;_ azure _sugg. Collier_
dispersed (variant of "faded")
Collier's suggestion: see Textual Appendix.  The syntax of lines
She also dofte her heauy haberieon,
And her well plighted frock, which she did won
She low let fall, that flowd from her lanck syde
Then of them all she plainly was espyde,
The fairest woman wight, that euer eye did see.
Like as +_Minerua_+, being late returnd
Where proud _Encelade_, whose wide nosethrils burnd
Transfixed with +the+ speare, downe tombled ded
Hath loosd her helmet from her lofty hed,
From her left arme, to rest in glorious victorye.
another name for her.  Bellona is sometimes represented as the
wife of Mars, while Minerva, specifically, is identified with
Pallas Athene, the virgin goddess.  Cf. 307.52:6, 706.3:7,
from Uranus on the earth, piled Mount Ossa on Mount Pelion in
order to launch an unsuccessful attack on Olympus, abode of the
gods)
Jupiter and buried under Mount Etna, whence he still breathes
fire.  In _Myth._ 6.21 it is Minerva who kills him)
Thrace and Moesia.  Spenser's source for this detail is not
known; Jupiter killed Typhoeus on Mount Haemus)
serpents for hair, wings, brazen claws, and huge teeth.  One of
them, Medusa, was a mortal.  According to most accounts, Medusa
desecrated one of Minerva's temples and the goddess turned her
into a Gorgon in punishment.  Medusa's visage became so horrible
that anyone who saw it was turned to stone.  Perseus managed to
kill her (using a mirror so that he did not have to look at her
directly); and afterwards Minerva placed Medusa's head in the
centre of her shield or breastplate.  See _Met._ 4.790-803)
Which whenas they beheld, they smitten were
And each on other, and they all on her
Had them surprised.  At last auizing right,
Which they so much mistooke, they tooke delight
With wonder of her beauty fed their hungry vew.
figure
Yet note their hungry vew be satisfide,
And euer firmely fixed did abide
But +most+ they meruaild at her cheualree,
That much they faynd to know, who she mote bee;
Yet euery one her likte, and euery one her loued.
And _Paridell_ though partly discontent
Yet was soone wonne his malice to relent,
And knightly worth, which he too late did try,
Then they _Malbecco_ prayd of curtesy,
And company at meat, to do them more delight.
But he to shift their curious request,
Her crased health, her late recourse to rest,
But none of those excuses could take place;
She came in presence with right comely grace,
And shewd her selfe in all a gentle curteous Dame.
They sate to meat, and _Satyrane_ his chaunce
But he him selfe sate looking still askaunce,
Sir _Satyrane_, +that+ glaunces might not glyde:
All his +demeasnure+ from his sight did hyde:
And sent close messages of loue to her at will.
Britomart might yet be a man)
And euer and anone, when none was ware,
He rou'd at her, and told his secret care:
Ne was she ignoraunt of that lewd lore,
And with the like him answerd euermore:
Empoisned was with priuy lust, and gealous dred.
message}
He from that deadly throw made no defence,
The wicked engine through false influence,
Into his hart, which it did sorely gryde.
Ne paine at all; for he so oft had tryde
That thing of course he counted, loue to entertaine.
Thenceforth to her he sought to intimate
Now _Bacchus_ fruit out of the siluer plate
Or of the fruitfull liquor ouerflowne,
Or therein write to let his loue be showne;
A sacrament prophane in mistery of wine.
And when so of his hand the pledge she raught,
And in her lap did shed her idle draught,
By such close signes they secret way did make
Two eyes him needeth, for to watch and wake,
By their faire handling, put into _Malbeccoes_ cape.
one: see Chaucer, introduction to _The Prioress's Tale_, 1630)
Now when of meats and drinks they had their fill,
Vnto those knights aduenturous, to tell
And euery one his kindred, and his name.
Of gracious speach, and skill his words to frame
Him to commend to her, thus spake, of all well eyde.
_Troy_, that art now nought, but an idle name,
Though whilome far much greater then thy fame,
Vpon thee heapt a direfull destinie,
And fetch from heauen thy great Genealogie,
Their of-spring hath embaste, and later glory shent.
Jupiter.  Furthermore, Aeneas, who ruled Troy after the fall of
the house of Priam, was a son of Venus)
here regarded as a singular sb.)
Most famous Worthy of the world, by whome
And stately towres of _Ilion_ whilome
Sir _Paris_ far renowmd through noble fame,
From _Laced{ae}mon_ fetcht the fairest Dame,
Whom _Venus_ to him gaue for meed of worthinesse.
Menelaus, its king)
Faire _Helene_, flowre of beautie excellent,
That madest many Ladies deare lament
Which they far off beheld from _Troian_ toures,
With carcases of noble warrioures,
And _Xanthus_ sandy bankes with bloud all ouerflowne.
From him my linage I deriue aright,
Whiles yet on _Ida_ he a shepheard hight,
Whom for remembraunce of her passed ioy,
Who, after _Greekes_ did _Priams_ realme destroy,
And with them sayling thence, to th'Isle of _Paros_ came.
birth his mother, Hecuba, dreamed she had brought forth a fire-
brand which ignited the whole city.  Thus as soon as the child
was born he was left out on Mount Ida; but he was found and sub-
sequently raised by a shepherd, who gave him the name of Paris)
That was by him cald _Paros_, which before
And built _Nausicle_ by the _Pontick_ shore,
To _Paridas_ his sonne.
But for faire Ladies loue, and glories gaine,
In +sewing+ deeds of armes, my liues and labours end.
Whenas the noble _Britomart_ heard tell
The ruefull story of Sir _Paridell_,
With zelous enuy of Greekes cruell fact,
She heard, that she was lineally extract:
And _Troynouant_ was built of old _Troyes_ ashes cold.
Then sighing soft awhile, at last she thus:
Which raignd so many yeares victorious,
In one sad night consumd, and throwen downe:
Is not empierst with deepe compassiowne,
That floures so fresh at morne, and fades at euening late?
Behold, Sir, how your pitifull complaint
For nothing may impresse so deare constraint,
But if it should not grieue you, backe agayne
What to _Aeneas_ fell; sith that men sayne
Consum'd, but did him selfe to safetie retyre.
_Anchyses_ sonne begot of _Venus_ faire,
And with a remnant did to sea repaire,
Full many yeares, and weetlesse wandered
Ere rest he found.  Much there he suffered,
To saue his people sad from victours vengefull hands.
At last in _Latium_ he did arriue,
Of th'inland folke, which sought him backe to driue,
To contract wedlock: (so the fates ordaind.)
Accomplished, that many deare complaind:
Escaped hardly, hardly praisd his wedlock good.
and Numicus.  Its people were among the most ancient inhabitants
of Italy, and are sometimes called "Aborigines".  Their town of
Alba Longa boasted a Trojan origin, though the story of Trojan
settlement in Italy is probably no more credible than that of
Trojan settlement in Britain)
king of the Rutulians)
Yet after all, he victour did suruiue,
But after, when both nations gan to striue,
His sonne _I{u"}lus_ did from thence depart,
And in long _Alba_ plast his throne apart,
Till _Romulus_ renewing it, to _Rome_ +remoud+.
Ascanius)
was the founder of Rome)
There there (said _Britomart_) a fresh appeard
And _Troy_ againe out of her dust was reard,
Of all the world vnder her gouerning.
Out of the _Troians_ scattered of-spring,
Both first and second _Troy_ shall dare to equalise.
It _Troynouant_ is hight, that with the waues
Vpon whose stubborne neck, whereat he raues
That all men feare to tempt his billowes strong,
That it a wonder of the world is song
Beholding it from far, do thinke it threates the skye.
The _Troian Brute_ did first that Citie found,
And _Ouert_ gate by North: that is the bound
So huge a scope at first him seemed best,
So huge a mind could not in lesser rest,
That _Albion_ had conquered first by warlike feat.
identifiable)
Ah fairest Lady knight, (said _Paridell_)
Who had forgot, that whilome I heard tell
Indeed he said (if I remember right,)
Another plant, that raught to wondrous hight,
Into the vtmost Angle of the world he knew.
For that same _Brute_, whom much he did aduaunce
Whom hauing slaine, through luckles arrowes glaunce
Or else for shame, so fowle reproch to shonne,
Where wearie wandring they long time did wonne,
And great aduentures found, that now were long to sayne.
sea personified as a god}
At last by fatall course they driuen were
The furthest North, that did to them appeare:
Found it the fittest soyle for their abode,
But wholy wast, and void of peoples trode,
That fed on liuing flesh, and druncke mens vitall blood.
was empty of people; then again, perhaps the giants' appetites
had left it so)
Whom he through wearie wars and labours long,
In which the great _Goemagot_ of strong
Were ouerthrowne, and layd on th'earth full cold,
A famous history to be enrold
That all the antique Worthies merits far did passe.
His worke great _Troynouant_, his worke is eke
That who from East to West will endlong seeke,
Except _Cleopolis_: so heard I say
Your countrey kin, and you entirely pray
Betwixt vs both vnknowne.  So ended _Paridell_.
hence, elsewhere in the allegory, intended to denote London)
But all the while, that he these speaches spent,
With vigilant regard, and dew attent,
In her fraile wit, that now her quite forlore:
And greedy eares her weake hart from her bore:
In speaking, many false belgardes at her let fly.
So long these knights discoursed diuersly,
Which they had past with mickle ieopardy,
And heauenly lampes were halfendeale ybrent:
Euery discourse and euery argument,
Them go to rest.  So all vnto their bowres were brought.
_Paridell rapeth Hellenore:
Findes emongst Satyres, whence with him
usually portrayed as more or less lustful.  In Roman mythology,
Satyr, one of the satyrs, is a companion of Bacchus with long,
pointed ears, behind which are the stumps of horns, with the tail
of a goat, bristly hair, and a flat nose.  Unlike those at 106.7
ff., the satyrs in this canto conform to the usual literary
pattern)
THe morow next, so soone as _Ph{oe}bus_ Lamp
And fresh _Aurora_ had the shady damp
Faire _Britomart_ and that same _Faerie_ knight
But _Paridell_ complaynd, that his late fight
That ryde he could not, till his hurts he did amend.
be-rayed, covered with rays
Tithonus and Malbecco; at 102.7:2 Aurora is described as "weary
of aged _Tithones_ saffron bed")
So forth they far'd, but he behind them stayd,
To house a guest, that would be needes obayd,
Might wanting measure moueth surquedry.
That fierce youngmans vnruly maistery;
And his faire wife, whom honest long he kept vneath.
leads to arrogance (measure = temperance, moderation; surquidry =
arrogance, presumption)
woman" (302.47:4))
But patience perforce he must abie,
Fond is the feare, that findes no remedie;
By which he feareth euill happen may:
Ne doth he suffer her, nor night, nor day,
So doth he punish her and eke himselfe torment.
or not.  Cf. 203.3:3)
But _Paridell_ kept better watch, then hee,
False loue, why do men say, thou canst not see,
That with thy charmes the sharpest sight doest bind,
And seest euery secret of the mind;
All that is by the working of thy Deitee.
So perfect in that art was _Paridell_,
His halfen eye he wiled wondrous well,
Both eyes and hart attonce, during the whyle
That _Cupid_ selfe it seeing, close did smyle,
And bad, that none their ioyous treason should reueale.
= halved eyesight, for he is blind in one eye: see 309.27:6)
The learned louer lost no time nor tyde,
Yet bore so faire a saile, that none espyde
When so in open place, and commune bord,
Her courted her, yet bayted euery word,
Of vile vngentlenesse, or hospitages breach.
pleasing pun)
her, with the intention of boarding.  Spenser also uses "abord",
"aboord" (cf. _Hubberd_ 324, _RR_ 185) to mean "adrift" or
"astray")
But when apart (if euer her apart)
And all the sleights vnbosomd in his hart;
And cast himselfe on ground her fast besyde:
He wept, and wayld, and false laments belyde,
That he mote algates dye, yet did his death forgiue.
intensive)
And otherwhiles with amorous delights,
Now singing sweetly, to surprise her sprights,
Bransles, Ballads, virelayes, and verses vaine;
And thousands like, which flowed in his braine,
To take +to+ his new loue, and leaue her old despysd.
intended)
"November"}
And euery where he might, and euery while
At hand with humble pride, and pleasing guile,
Who well perceiued all, and all indewed.
With which he many weake harts had subdewed
What wonder then, if she were likewise carried?
(Latin _inducere_, to lead in)
cognate with _seduco_ and hence "seduce")
No fort so fensible, no wals so strong,
Or daily siege through dispuruayance long,
And +Peece+, that vnto parley eare will giue,
The vassall of the victors will byliue:
This crafty Paramoure, and now it plaine displayd.
For through his traines he her intrapped hath,
To him, without regard of gaine, or scath,
Whom she hath vow'd to dub a faire Cucquold.
Deuized hath, and to her louer told.
So readie rype to ill, ill wemens counsels bee.
Darke was the Euening, fit for louers stealth,
She to his closet went, where all his wealth
The which she meant away with her to beare;
As _Hellene_, when she saw aloft appeare
Did clap her hands, and ioyed at that dolefull sight.
This second _Hellene_, faire Dame _Hellenore_,
To quench the flames which she had tyn'd before,
And ranne into her louers armes right fast;
And call aloud for helpe, ere helpe were past;
And meant to rauish her, that rather had to dy.
The wretched man hearing her call for ayd,
In his disquiet mind was much dismayd:
And saw the wicked fire so furiously
He was therewith distressed diuersly,
Was neuer wretched man in such a wofull cace.
Ay when to him she cryde, to her he turnd,
But when he marked, how his money burnd,
Both was he loth to loose his loued Dame,
Yet sith he n'ote saue both, he sau'd that same,
The God of his desire, the ioy of misers blind.
Thus whilest all things in troublous vprore were,
The louing couple need no reskew feare,
Their purpost flight, free from all mens reclame;
Gaue them safe conduct, till to end they came:
Of louers loosely knit, where list them to repaire.
Soone as the cruell flames yslaked were,
Out of the flames, which he had quencht whylere
Full deepe emplonged was, and drowned nye,
He rau'd, he wept, he stampt, he lowd did cry,
Did him attonce oppresse, and vex his caytiue spright.
intensive)
Long thus he chawd the cud of inward griefe,
Still when he mused on his late mischiefe,
And seem'd more grieuous, then it was before:
Ne griefe might not his loue to him restore,
Ten thousand wayes he cast in his confused thought.
At last resoluing, like a pilgrim pore,
And bearing with him treasure in close store,
To seeke her endlong, both by sea and lond.
And euery where that he mote vnderstond,
And of eachone he met, he tydings did inquere.
But all in vaine, his woman was too wise,
And he too simple euer to surprise
One day, as he forpassed by the plaine
A couple, seeming well to be his twaine,
As if they lay in wait, or else themselues did hide.
based in falconry)
Well weened he, that those the same mote bee,
Him seemed more their manner did agree;
Whom, to be _Paridell_ he did deuize;
Discolour'd like to womanish disguise,
And euer his faint hart much +earned+ at the sight.
consonant with his perception of "ill wemens counsels": see
And euer faine he towards them would goe,
But stood aloofe, vnweeting what to doe;
That is the father of foule gealosy,
But, as he nigher drew, he easily
Ne yet her Belamour, the partner of his sheet.
But it was scornefull _Braggadocchio_,
Sith late he fled from his too earnest foe:
He turned backe, and would haue fled arere;
And bad before his soueraine Lord appere:
And comming him before, low louted on the lay.
The Boaster at him sternely bent his browe,
That to the ground him meekely made to bowe,
That euery member of his bodie quooke.
Vnfitly furnisht with thy bag and booke,
To proue some deedes of armes vpon an equall pere.
The wretched man at his imperious speach,
Good Sir, let not my +rudenesse+ be no breach
For I vnwares this way by fortune straid,
That seeke a Lady, There he suddein staid,
While teares stood in his eies, few drops of bitternesse.
What Ladie, man? (said _Trompart_) take good hart,
Was neuer better time to shew thy smart,
That is the whole worlds commune remedy.
And with vaine hope his spirits faint supply,
Vouchsafe with mild regard a wretches cace to heare.
Then sighing sore, It is not long (said hee)
Of whom a knight, no knight at all perdee,
By treacherous deceipt did me depriue;
And with fowle force vnto his will did driue,
Are bound for to reuenge, and punish if they may.
And you most noble Lord, that can and dare
Cannot employ your most victorious speare
And for a Ladie gainst a faithlesse knight;
And all faire Ladies magnifie your might,
Your worthy paine shall well reward with guerdon rich.
With that out of his bouget forth he drew
But he on it lookt scornefully askew,
Or a war-monger to be basely nempt;
And eke thy words vncourteous and vnkempt;
That, were it not for shame, So turned from him wroth.
But _Trompart_, that his maisters humor knew,
Was inly tickled with that golden vew,
Yet stoupt he not, but lay still in the wind,
Till _Trompart_ lowly to the ground inclind,
And pardon simple man, that rash did him displease.
Bigge looking like a doughtie Doucepere,
I pardon yield, +and with+ thy rudenesse beare;
And all that else the vaine world vaunten may,
Fame is my meed, and glory +vertues+ +pray+.
And mou'd amisse with massie mucks vnmeet regard.
his twelve peers or paladins; in history, one of the twelve great
peers of France}
And +more+, I graunt to thy great miserie
And that vile knight, who euer that he bee,
By _Sanglamort_ my sword, whose deadly dent
I sweare, ere long shall dearely it repent;
But soone he shall be found, and shortly doen be ded.
The foolish man thereat woxe wondrous blith,
And humbly thanked him a thousand sith,
Tho forth the Boaster marching, braue begonne
As if he heauen and hell would ouerronne,
That much _Malbecco_ ioyed in his iollity.
will regain it at 503.29)
Thus long they three together traueiled,
To seeke his wife, that was farre wandered:
To weete the treasure, which he did bewray,
With purpose, how they might it best betray;
The same behold, therewith their keene desires were whet.
deliver up); _also:_ lead astray, seduce
It fortuned as they together far'd,
Vpon the plaine, the which himselfe prepar'd
As on aduenture by the way he past:
For hauing filcht her bels, her vp he cast
He nould be clogd.  So had he serued many one.
things from open windows, etc.)
attached to the legs of falcons by their trainers)
falconry)
The gentle Lady, loose at randon left,
At wilde aduenture, like a forlorne weft,
Straying alone withouten groome or guide;
With them as housewife euer to abide,
And euery one as commune good her handeled.
the greenwood)
That shortly she _Malbecco_ has forgot,
Who from her went to seeke another lot,
Where those two guilers with _Malbecco_ were:
He fainted, and was almost dead with feare,
But to him louted low, and greeted goodly well.
And after asked him for _Hellenore_,
She wonneth in the forrest there before.
The whiles the Boaster from his loftie sell
But the fresh Swayne would not his leasure dwell,
He vp remounted light, and after faind to wend.
to be read as "at his leisure")
Perdy nay (said _Malbecco_) shall ye not:
For litle good of him is to be got,
But let vs go to seeke my dearest Dame,
For of her safety in great doubt I +am+,
Then all the world is lost, and we in vaine haue toyld.
+They+ all agree, and forward them addrest:
That yonder in that +wastefull+ wildernesse
Dragons, and Minotaures, and feendes of hell,
All trauellers; therefore aduise ye well,
One may his iourney bring too soone to euill end.
_Malbecco_ stopt in great astonishment,
Their counsell crau'd, in daunger imminent.
With burden of great treasure, I thinke best
My Lord and I will search the wide forrest.
For he was much affraid, himselfe alone to find.
Then is it best (said he) that ye doe leaue
Either fast closed in some hollow greaue,
Till we returne againe in safetie:
Hence farre away we will blindfolded lie,
It pleased: so he +did.+  Then they march forward braue.
the private meaning intended by Trompart at line 8)
Now when amid the thickest woods they were,
And shrieking Hububs them approching nere,
That dreadfull sound the boasters hart did thrill,
Ne euer looked backe for good or ill,
The old man could not fly, but fell to ground halfe ded.
Yet afterwards close creeping, as he might,
The iolly _Satyres_ full of fresh delight,
Faire +_Helenore_+, with girlonds all bespred,
She proud of that new honour, which they red,
Daunst liuely, and her face did with a Lawrell shade.
Mayday)
sun, song and music)
The silly man that in the thicket lay
Yet durst he not against it doe or say,
To see th'vnkindnesse of his _Hellenore_.
And with their horned feet the greene grasse wore,
Till drouping _Ph{oe}bus_ gan to hide his golden hed.
Tho vp they gan their merry pypes to trusse,
But euery _Satyre_ first did giue a busse
Now gan the humid vapour shed the ground
Did dim the brightnesse of the welkin round,
To shrowd themselues, whiles sleepe their senses did inuade.
Wantons, but our Wives we kisse")
Which when +_Melbecco_+ saw, out of +his+ bush
And like a Gote emongst the Gotes did rush,
And misty dampe of misconceiuing night,
He did the better counterfeite aright:
That none of all the _Satyres_ him espyde or heard.
At night, when all they went to sleepe, he vewd,
Embraced of a _Satyre_ rough and rude,
Nine times he heard him come aloft ere day,
But yet that nights ensample did bewray,
When one so +oft+ a night did ring his matins bell.
So closely as he could, he to them crept,
And to his wife, that now full soundly slept,
That it was he, which by her side did dwell,
As one out of a dreame not waked well,
Yet her for to awake he did the more constraine.
At last with irkesome trouble she abrayd;
Her old _Malbecco_, which did her vpbrayd,
She was astonisht with exceeding dreed,
But he her prayd, for mercy, or for meed,
But hearken to his lore, and all his counsell +hyde+.
to_
Tho gan he her perswade, to leaue that lewd
And home returne, where all should be renewd
And she receiu'd againe to bed and bord,
But she it all refused at one word,
But chose emongst the iolly _Satyres_ still to wonne.
He wooed her, till day +spring+ he espyde;
Who butted him with hornes on euery syde,
Was fowly dight, and he of death afeard.
Out of the ruddy East was fully reard,
And he emongst the rest crept forth in sory plight.
So soone as he the Prison dore did pas,
And neuer looked, who behind him was,
That creeping close, amongst the hiues to reare
And him assayling, sore his carkasse teare,
Ne stayes, till safe himselfe he see from ieopardy.
Ne stayd he, till he came vnto the place,
Where when he found it not (for _Trompart_ bace
With extreme fury he became quite mad,
That who so straungely had him seene bestad,
From Limbo lake him late escaped sure would say.
hell where the unbaptized are confined; "lake" comes to us via
Latin from the Greek _lakkos_, = pit, hollow, hole (filled with
water or not))
High ouer hilles and ouer dales he fled,
Ne banck nor bush could stay him, when he sped
Griefe, and despight, and gealosie, and scorne
And he himselfe himselfe loath'd so forlorne,
That as a Snake, still lurked in his wounded mind.
disintegrating mind, together with Grief, Jealousy, and Scorn:
see Upton (1758))
Still fled he forward, looking backward still,
Till that he came vnto a rockie hill,
That liuing creature it would terrify,
From thence he threw himselfe dispiteously,
That seem'd no helpe for him was left in liuing sight.
But through long anguish, and selfe-murdring thought
That all his substance was consum'd to nought,
That on the rockes he fell so flit and light,
But chaunced on a craggy cliff to light;
That at the last he found a caue with entrance small.
Into the same he creepes, and thenceforth there
In drery darkenesse, and continuall feare
Threates with huge ruine him to fall vpon,
Still ope he keepes for that occasion;
The roring billowes beat his bowre so boystrously.
Ne euer is he wont on ought to feed,
Which in his cold complexion do breed
Matter of doubt and dread suspitious,
Corrupts the stomacke with gall vitious,
And doth transfixe the soule with deathes eternall dart.
"dry".  The "humours", in medieval physiology, were the four
chief fluids of the body: blood, phlegm, choler and melancholy.
A person's temperament was determined by the relative proportions
of these four cardinal humours)
who is alive}
Yet can he neuer dye, but dying liues,
That death and life attonce vnto him giues.
There dwels he euer, miserable swaine,
Where he through priuy griefe, and horrour vaine,
Forgot he was a man, and _Gealosie_ is hight.
_Britomart chaceth Ollyphant,
Assayes the house of Busyrane,
attacks
cruelties included the sacrifice of strangers to Jupiter.  See
Ovid, _Ars Amatoria_ 1.643-58)
O Hatefull hellish Snake, what furie furst
Where in her bosome she thee long had nurst,
Fowle Gealosie, that turnest loue diuine
With hatefull thoughts to languish and to pine,
Of all the passions in the mind thou vilest art.
or consists of, snakes: see e.g. _Aen._ 7.342-55)
"hell-fire": cf. 101.16:7)
the consort of Pluto)
O let him far be banished away,
Sweet Loue, that doth his +golden+ wings embay
Vntroubled of vile feare, or bitter fell.
In th'harts of men, them gouerne wisely well,
That was as trew in loue, as Turtle to her make.
Who with Sir _Satyrane_, as earst ye red,
Farr off +aspyde+ a young man, the which fled
And hatefull outrage long him chaced thus;
Of that _Argante_ vile and vitious,
This all as bad as she, and worse, if worse ought were.
For as the sister did in feminine
So he surpassed his sex masculine,
Whom when as _Britomart_ beheld behind
She was emmoued in her noble mind,
And pricked fiercely forward, where she +him did+ vew.
Ne was Sir _Satyrane_ her far behinde,
Whom when the Gyaunt saw, he soone resinde
They after both, and boldly bad him bace,
But he them both outran a wondrous space,
And now made better speed, t'escape his feared foe.
base")
It was not _Satyrane_, whom he did feare,
For he the powre of chast hands might not beare,
And now so fast his feet he did apply,
Where he is shrowded in security.
They searched diuersely, so both diuided were.
Faire _Britomart_ so long him followed,
By which there lay a knight all wallowed
His haberieon, his helmet, and his speare;
On which the winged boy in colours cleare
And he thereby, where euer it in field was showne.
His face vpon the ground did groueling ly,
That the braue Mayd would not for courtesy,
Nor seeme too suddeinly him to inuade:
Him grone, as if his hart were peeces made,
That pitty did the Virgins hart of patience rob.
At last forth breaking into bitter plaintes
And raignst in blis emongst thy blessed Saintes,
So long vnwreaked of thine enimy?
Or doth thy iustice sleepe, and silent ly?
If goodnesse find no grace, nor righteousnesse no meed?
seeking redress}
If good find grace, and righteousnesse reward,
Sith that more bounteous creature neuer far'd
Or if that heauenly iustice may withstand
Why then is _Busirane_ with wicked hand
My Lady and my loue so cruelly to pen?
My Lady and my loue is +cruelly+ pend
Whilest deadly torments do her chast brest rend,
All for she _Scudamore_ will not denay.
Ne canst her ayde, ne canst her foe dismay;
For whom so faire a Lady feeles so sore a wound.
There an huge heape of +singults+ did oppresse
His foltring toung with pangs of drerinesse,
As if his dayes were come to their last reach.
Threatning into his life to make a breach,
Fearing least from her cage the wearie soule would flit.
in the 1611 edition_
Tho stooping downe she him amoued light;
And seeing him behind a straunger knight,
With great indignaunce he that sight forsooke,
+Abiecting,+ th'earth with his faire forhead strooke:
Fit medcine to his griefe, and spake thus courtesly.
intensive)
Ah gentle knight, whose deepe +conceiued+ griefe
Yet if that heauenly grace some good reliefe
And euer in your noble hart prepense,
Then vertues might, and values confidence,
Must not here thinke to liue: for life is wretchednesse.
Therefore, faire Sir, do comfort to you take,
Hath outrag'd you, and thrald your gentle make.
And wreake your sorrow on your cruell foe,
Those feeling wordes so neare the quicke did goe,
And leaning on his elbow, these few wordes let fly.
What boots it plaine, that cannot be redrest,
Sith powre of hand, nor skill of learned brest,
Out of her thraldome and continuall feare?
By strong enchauntments and blacke Magicke leare,
And many dreadfull feends hath pointed to her gard.
There he tormenteth her most terribly,
Because to yield him loue she doth deny,
But yet by torture he would her constraine
Till so she do, she must in doole remaine,
What boots it then to plaine, that cannot be redrest?
of Busirane)
With this sad hersall of his heauy stresse,
And said; Sir knight, your cause is nothing lesse,
For nothing so much pitty doth implore,
But yet, if please ye listen to my lore,
Deliuer her fro thence, or with her for you dy.
Ah gentlest knight aliue, (said _Scudamore_)
Dwels in thy bounteous brest? what couldst thou more,
O spare thy happy dayes, and them apply
More is more losse: one is enough to dy.
Endlesse renowm, that more then +death+ is to be sought.
Thus she at length perswaded him to rise,
Mote him befall vpon new enterprise;
She gathered vp and did about him dresse,
So forth they both yfere make their progresse,
Till they arriu'd, whereas their purpose they did plot.
affairs; result; also: fortune}
There they dismounting, drew their weapons bold
Whereas no gate they found, them to withhold,
But in the Porch, that did them sore amate,
And stinking Sulphure, that with griesly hate
Enforced them their forward footing to reuoke.
Greatly thereat was _Britomart_ dismayd,
For daunger vaine it were, to haue assayd
Ne none can suffer to approchen neare:
What monstrous enmity prouoke we heare,
Battell against the Gods? so we a God inuade.
_1590_
from the blood that fell from Uranus on Ge (the Earth), piled
Mount Ossa on Mount Pelion in order to launch an unsuccessful
attack on Olympus, abode of the gods)
Daunger without discretion to attempt,
Aread what course of you is safest dempt,
This +is+ (quoth he) the dolorous despight,
This fire be quencht by any wit or might,
So mighty be th'enchauntments, which the same do stay.
What is there else, but cease these fruitlesse paines,
Faire _Amoret_ must dwell in wicked chaines,
Perdy not so; (said she) for shamefull thing
For shew of perill, without venturing:
Then enterprised prayse for dread to disauaunce.
Therewith resolu'd to proue her vtmost might,
And her swords point directing forward right,
And did it selfe diuide with equall space,
+Perceth+ the yielding ayre, and doth displace
So to her yold the flames, and did their force reuolt.
Whom whenas _Scudamour_ saw past the fire,
With greedy will, and enuious desire,
But cruell _Mulciber_ would not obay
His mighty rage, and +with+ imperious sway
And backe retire, all scorcht and pitifully brent.
are: (1) odious, invidious (since the flames are allegorically
the product of his desires); (2) full of emulation (of Britomart
or her success in passing the flames); (3) malicious, generated
by ill-will (directed against Busirane); (4) actuated by envy (of
Britomart))
With huge impatience he inly swelt,
Then for the burning torment, which he felt,
And wilfully him throwing on the gras,
The whiles the Championesse now entred has
The vtmost rowme, abounding with all precious store.
For round about, the wals yclothed were
Wouen with gold and silke so close and nere,
As faining to be hid from enuious eye;
It shewd it selfe, and shone vnwillingly;
Through the greene gras his long bright burnisht backe declares.
France, famous for its rich tapestries, which were often made in
the form of wall-hangings)
the near-point of vision in order to be stitched)
And in those Tapets weren fashioned
And all of loue, and all of lusty-hed,
And eke all _Cupids_ warres they did repeate,
Gainst all the Gods, to make his empire great;
On mighty kings and kesars, into thraldome brought.
carpet, etc.}
Therein was writ, how often thundring _Ioue_
And leauing heauens kingdome, here did roue
Now like a Ram, faire _Helle_ to peruart,
Ah, how the fearefull Ladies tender hart
The huge seas vnder her t'obay her seruaunts law.
thunderbolt)
Because of the intrigues of her stepmother, Ino, she and her
brother were to be sacrificed to Jupiter; but Nephele rescued her
two children, who rode away through the air on the ram with the
golden fleece, a gift from Mercury.  Helle fell into the sea,
which was called after her the Hellespont.  See Ovid, _Fasti_,
Iliad, daughter of Phoenix.  Jupiter fell in love with her,
assumed the form of a bull and mingled with the herd as Europa
and her maidens were by the shore.  Charmed by the tameness of
the beast, Europa climbed on its back, whereupon Jupiter rushed
into the sea and swam with her to Crete.  The continent of Europe
is said to be named after her.  See _Met._ 2.833 ff.)
the tapestry)
Soone after that into a golden showre
And through the roofe of her strong brasen towre
The whiles her foolish garde, that little knew
And watcht, that none should enter nor issew;
Whenas the God to golden hew him selfe transfard.
in a brazen tower because an oracle had foretold that she would
give birth to a son who would kill his grandfather.  Transformed
into a golden shower, Jupiter came down through the roof and
fathered Perseus, who did indeed eventually kill Acrisius, by
means of an accident in the public games at Larissa)
Then was he turnd into a snowy Swan,
O wondrous skill, and sweet wit of the man,
From scorching heat her daintie limbes to shade:
And brushing his faire brest, did her inuade;
How towards her he rusht, and smiled at his pryde.
seduction she brought forth two eggs, one containing Helen (over
whom the Trojan war was fought) and the other Castor and Pollux)
observation from nature)
Then shewd it, how the _Thebane Semelee_
To see him in his soueraigne maiestee,
Whence dearely she with death bought her desire.
Ioying his loue in likenesse more entire;
He then did put, +her+ pleasures lenger to partake.
The jealous Juno appeared to her in the form of her aged nurse,
and induced her to ask Jupiter to visit her in the same splendour
and majesty with which he appeared to Juno.  Jupiter warned her
of the danger of this request; but, as he had sworn to grant
whatever Semele desired, he was obliged to comply, and appeared
before her as Jupiter Tonans.  Semele was killed by the
lightning; but Jupiter saved her child, Bacchus, with whom she
was then pregnant)
married Amphitryton, but refused to lie with him until he avenged
the murder of her brothers.  On the eve of Amphitryton's return,
Jupiter appeared to Alcmene disguised as Amphitryton and fathered
Hercules.  See _DGDG_ 6.1, _Epithalamion_ 326-7)
Twise was he seene in soaring Eagles shape,
Once, when he with _Asterie_ did scape,
He snatcht from _Ida_ hill, and with him bare:
How the rude Shepheards after him did stare,
And often to him calling, to take surer hould.
order to escape Jupiter's advances she transformed herself into a
quail and threw herself down from heaven; whereupon he trans-
formed himself into an eagle.  See _Met._ 6.108; Hesiod,
_Theogony_ 404-12; Hyginus, _Fabulae_ 53)
beautiful of all mortals; the details of his abduction vary in
different accounts.  Spenser follows _Met._ 10.155 ff., _DGDG_
also as the scene of the judgement of Paris; see 207.55)
In _Satyres_ shape _Antiopa_ he snatcht:
A shepheard, when _Mnemosyne_ he catcht:
Whiles thus on earth great _Ioue_ these pageaunts playd,
And scoffing, thus vnto his mother sayd,
And take me for their _Ioue_, whiles _Ioue_ to earth is gone.
like below, usually portrayed as more or less lustful.  In Roman
mythology, Satyr, one of the satyrs, is a companion of Bacchus
with long, pointed ears, behind which are the stumps of horns,
with the tail of a goat, bristly hair, and a flat nose)
Zethus)
Aeacus (Hyginus, _Fabulae_ 52))
later, the wife of Pluto.  See _Met._ 6.110-114, where she is
called "Deoida" after Deo (another name for Ceres))
And thou, faire _Ph{oe}bus_, in thy colours bright
In which that boy thee plonged, for despight,
When she with _Mars_ was meynt in ioyfulnesse:
To loue faire _Daphne_, which thee loued lesse:
Yet was thy loue her death, and her death was thy smart.
wife, was disclosed to Vulcan by Apollo.  Vulcan caught the
guilty pair in an invisible net, and exposed them to the laughter
of the assembled gods)
unhappy love respectively.  See _Met._ 1.466-71)
but according to _Met._ 4.171 ff. Apollo was punished for his
indiscretion by being made to love Leucothea, who was buried
alive by her father, whereupon Apollo transformed her into an
incense bush)
So louedst thou the lusty _Hyacinct_,
Yet both are of thy haplesse hand extinct,
The one a Paunce, the other a sweet breare:
The God himselfe rending his golden heare,
With other signes of sorrow and impatient teene.
Aesculapius; see _Met._ 2.542-632)
Both for those two, and for his owne deare sonne,
Who bold to guide the charet of the Sunne,
And all the world with flashing +fier+ brent,
Yet cruell _Cupid_, not herewith content,
And loue a Shepheards daughter for his dearest Dame.
He loued _Isse_ for his dearest Dame,
And for her sake a cowheard vile became,
Whiles that from heauen he suffered exile.
Now like a Lyon, hunting after spoile,
All which in that faire arras was most liuely writ.
is transformed to a lion and then a hawk in _Met._ 6.122-3.  Some
editors retain _Hag_ and feel Spenser may have been referring to
a "haggard", an untamed hawk caught in its adult plumage_
appearance to Isse, daughter of Macareus (_Met._ 6.124), and the
myth of Admetus, king of Pherae in Thessaly, whom Apollo was
obliged to serve as a herdsman for nine years for having slain
the Cyclops (see Hyginus, _Fabulae_ 50, _DGDG_ 4.10))
Next vnto him was _Neptune_ pictured,
His face was rugged, and his hoarie hed
He stearnly shooke, and therewith fierce did stryke
They trembling stood, and made a long broad dyke,
Which foure great _Hippodames_ did draw in temewise tyde.
perhaps this is a new creature, invented by Spenser, half horse
and half woman, the female counterpart of the centaur, aquatic
rather than terrestrial.  The prefix _hippo-_ comes from the
Greek word for "horse".  "Damaios" is an epithet of Neptune the
Tamer, from the Greek _damao_, to subdue; but "dame" (meaning
"wife", "woman") is cognate with the Latin _domina_ (meaning
"lady of the house", "mistress").  Maclean (1982) suggests
"sea-horse", from 311.41:1, which might however be a figurative
term.  See also 209.50:8)
His sea-horses did seeme to snort amayne,
That made the sparckling waues to smoke agayne,
Did shine with siluer, and shoot forth his beame.
And hong adowne his head, as he did dreame:
Ne ought but deare _Bisaltis_ ay could make him glad.
into a ewe; he changed himself into a ram.  See _Met._ 6.117 and
Hyginus, _Fabulae_ 188)
He loued eke _Iphimedia_ deare,
For whom he turnd him selfe into a Steare,
Also to win _Deucalions_ daughter bright,
And like a winged horse he tooke his flight,
On whom he got faire _Pegasus_, that flitteth in the ayre.
Ephialtes, the two Aloidae)
Sisyphus was also among his many children.  The god of the winds,
also called Aeolus, is the son of Arne and Neptune)
floating survivor of a flood sent by the supreme deity to destroy
degenerate mankind.  See _Met._ 6.116-20)
desecrated one of Minerva's temples by this union: see 309.22:8)
Gorgons; before her metamorphosis she was a beautiful maiden)
head was cut off by Perseus)
Next _Saturne_ was, (but who would euer weene,
Yet loue is sullein, and _Saturnlike_ seene,
That to a _Centaure_ did him selfe transmoue.
When for to compasse +_Philliras_+ hard loue,
And into her faire bosome made his grapes decline.
confused.  See _Met._ 6.125-6 and Hyginus, _Fabulae_ 138_
Cronos of the Greeks: he is hence the father of Jupiter, Neptune,
Pluto, Juno, etc.  He deprived Uranus of the government of the
world, and was in turn dethroned by Jupiter.  See _Met._ 6.126)
Icarius, in grief for whose death she hanged herself.  She was
loved by Bacchus, and was placed by him (or by Jupiter) among the
stars, becoming the constellation of Virgo; her father became
Bo{o"}tes)
and the lower parts of a horse)
Oceanus)
Long were to tell the amorous assayes,
The mighty _Mars_, to learne his wanton playes:
For many other Nymphes he sore did shreek,
Priuily moystening his horrid cheek.
And many wide woundes launched through his +inner+ +parts.+
peopled all parts of nature: the seas, springs, rivers, grottoes,
trees, mountains)
Ne did he spare (so cruell was the Elfe)
Ne did he spare sometime to pricke himselfe,
Which he had wrought to many others moe.
And spoiles, wherewith he all the ground did strow,
High heauen beholds sad louers nightly theeueryes.
Kings Queenes, Lords Ladies, Knights and Damzels gent
And mingled with the raskall rablement,
To shew Dan _Cupids_ powre and great effort:
Of broken bowes and arrowes shiuered short,
So liuely and so like, that liuing sence it fayld.
And at the vpper end of that faire rowme,
Of passing valew, and of great renowme,
Of massy gold, which with his owne light shone;
More sundry colours, then the proud _Pauone_
When her discolourd bow she spreds through +heauen bright+.
spelling of "heuen")_
Blindfold he was, and in his cruell fist
With which he shot at randon, when him list,
(Ah man beware, how thou those darts behold)
Whose hideous tayle his left foot did +enfold+,
That no man forth might draw, ne no man remedye.
his arrows strike: cf. 101.51:4, 203.23:6, 302.35:8, 304.6:8)
happy love respectively.  See _Met._ 1.466-71)
And vnderneath his feet was written thus,
And all the people in that ample hous
And oft committed fowle Idolatree.
Ne seeing could her wonder satisfie,
The whiles the passing brightnes her fraile sences dazed.
Tho as she backward cast her busie eye,
Ouer the dore thus written she did spye
Yet could not find what sence it figured:
She was no whit thereby discouraged
But forward with bold steps into the next roome went.
Much fairer, then the former, was that roome,
For not with arras made in painefull loome,
Wrought with wilde Antickes, which their follies playd,
A thousand monstrous formes therein were made,
For loue in thousand monstrous formes doth oft appeare.
plants}
And all about, the glistring walles were hong
Of mighty Conquerours and Captaines strong,
To cruell loue, and wrought their owne decayes:
And their proud girlonds of tryumphant bayes
To shew the victors might and mercilesse intent.
shoulders}
conquerors}
The warlike Mayde beholding earnestly
Did greatly +wonder,+ ne could satisfie
But more she meruaild that no footings trace,
And solemne silence ouer all that place:
So rich purueyance, ne them keepe with carefulnesse.
furnishings}
And as she lookt about, she did behold,
_Be bold, be bold_, and euery where _Be bold_,
By any ridling skill, or commune wit.
Another yron dore, on which was writ,
Her earnest mind, yet wist not what it might intend.
Thus +she there+ waited vntill euentyde,
And now sad shadowes gan the world to hyde,
Yet nould she d'off her weary armes, for feare
Her heauy eyes with natures burdein deare,
And her welpointed weapons did about her dresse.
equipped
_The maske of Cupid, and th'enchaunted
Whence Britomart redeemes faire
THo when as chearlesse Night ycouered had
That euery wight dismayd with darknesse sad,
She heard a shrilling Trompet sound aloud,
Nought therewith daunted was her courage proud,
Expecting euer, when some foe she might descry.
With that, an hideous storme of winde arose,
And an earth-quake, as if it streight would lose
A direfull stench of smoke and sulphure mixt
From the fourth houre of night vntill the sixt;
Though much emmou'd, but stedfast still perseuered.
All suddenly a stormy whirlwind blew
With which that yron wicket open flew,
And forth issewd, as on the ready flore
That in his hand a branch of laurell bore,
Yclad in costly garments, fit for tragicke Stage.
hence: door: see 311.54:7}
Proceeding to the midst, he still did stand,
And to the vulgar beckning with his hand,
By liuely actions he gan bewray
Which doen, he backe retyred soft away,
_Ease_, on his robe in golden letters cyphered.
theatre)
The noble Mayd, still standing all this vewd,
With that a ioyous fellowship issewd
With wanton Bardes, and Rymers impudent,
A lay of loues delight, with sweet +concent+:
In manner of a maske, enranged orderly.
The whiles a most delitious harmony,
That the rare sweetnesse of the melody
And the fraile soule in deepe delight nigh dround:
That their report did farre away rebound,
The whiles the maskers marched forth in trim aray.
pretty
The first was _Fancy_, like a louely boy,
Matchable +either+ to that ympe of _Troy_,
Or that same daintie lad, which was so deare
He wailed womanlike with many a teare,
He fild with _Hylas_ name; the Nymphes eke _Hylas_ cryde.
When Hylas died, the distraught Hercules wandered the shore
crying his name)
Greeks peopled all parts of nature: the seas, springs, rivers,
grottoes, trees, mountains.  Here the reference is to the naiads,
who carried Hylas off when he went ashore to fetch fresh water)
His garment +neither+ was of silke nor say,
Like as the sunburnt _Indians_ do aray
As those same plumes, so seemd he vaine and light,
For still he far'd as dauncing in delight,
That in the idle aire he mou'd still here and there.
And him beside marcht amorous _Desyre_,
Yet was that +other+ swayne this elders syre,
His garment was disguised very vaine,
Twixt both his hands few sparkes he close did straine,
That soone they life conceiu'd, and forth in flames did fly.
clothing, and to dress in an unusual, fantastic, ostentatious, or
inappropriate manner.  Here, "disguised" might be taken to mean
"got up"}
Next after him went _Doubt_, who was yclad
That at his backe a brode Capuccio had,
He lookt askew with his mistrustfull eyes,
Or that the flore to shrinke he did auyse,
His feeble steps, which shrunke, when hard theron he lay.
capuchin monks; named after Capuccio in Florio)
suggests a possible reference to the garment called an alb, a
white tunic reaching to the feet.  Roche (1978) interprets
"Albanese" as "Scottish" (cf. 210.29:7).  The term is puzzling in
any case)
With him went _Daunger_, +cloth'd+ in ragged weed,
Yet his owne face was dreadfull, ne did need
A net in th'one hand, and rustie blade
With th'one his foes he threatned to inuade,
For whom he could not kill, he practizd to entrap.
(ppl. of "meng"): joined, attached, _hence:_ ensnared
Next him was _Feare_, all arm'd from top to toe,
But feard each shadow mouing to +and+ fro,
Or clashing heard, he fast away did fly,
And euermore on daunger fixt his eye,
Which his right hand vnarmed fearefully did wield.
"And when his own arms glittering he did spy ..."}
With him went _Hope_ in rancke, a handsome Mayd,
In silken samite she was light arayd,
She alway smyld, and in her hand did hold
With which she sprinckled fauours manifold,
Great liking vnto many, but true loue to feowe.
interwoven with gold}
And after them _Dissemblance_, and _Suspect_
For she was gentle, and of milde aspect,
Goodly adorned, and exceeding faire:
And her bright browes were deckt with borrowed haire:
And alwaies in her hand two clewes of silke she twynd.
a maze.  Cf. 201.8:3-4)
But he was foule, ill fauoured, and grim,
And euer as _Dissemblance_ laught on him,
Shewing his nature in his +countenance+;
But walkt each where, for feare of hid mischaunce,
Through which he still did peepe, as forward he did pace.
Next him went _Griefe_, and _Fury_ matched yfere;
Downe hanging his dull head, with heauy chere,
A paire of Pincers in his hand he had,
That from thenceforth a wretched life they lad,
Dying each day with inward wounds of dolours dart.
sad as he seems)
But _Fury_ was full ill appareiled
With ghastly lookes and dreadfull drerihed;
And from her head oft rent her snarled heare:
About her head, still roming here and there;
Forgetfull of his safety, hath his right way lost.
After them went _Displeasure_ and _Pleasance_,
And hanging downe his heauy countenance;
As if no sorrow she ne felt ne +drad+;
An angry Waspe th'one in a viall had
Thus marched these sixe couples forth in faire degree.
Spenser)
case the double negative supplied by "no" is intensive)
_hence:_ female honeybee, worker bee, queen bee
After all these there marcht a most faire Dame,
The other cleped _Cruelty_ by name:
Cald by strong charmes out of eternall night,
Full of sad signes, fearefull to liuing sight;
And with her feeble feet did moue a comely pace.
"charms")
and the preceding line give rise to at least three possible
readings.  (1) She, doleful lady, (like a cruel sprite Called by
strong charms out of eternal night) Had death's own image ...
(2) She, doleful lady (like a melancholy spirit Called by strong
charms out of eternal night), Had death's own image ... (3) She,
image ...)
Her brest all naked, as net iuory,
Wherewith the Craftesman wonts it beautify,
And a wide wound therein (O ruefull sight)
Yet freshly bleeding forth her fainting spright,
That dyde in sanguine red her skin all snowy cleene.
decoration which preserves decency}
At that wide orifice her trembling hart
Quite through transfixed with a deadly dart,
And those two villeins, which her steps vpstayd,
And +fading+ vitall powers gan to fade,
And euermore encreased her consuming paine.
Next after her the winged God himselfe
Taught to obay the menage of that Elfe,
Subdeweth to his +kingdome+ tyrannous:
That his proud spoyle of that same dolorous
Which seene, he much reioyced in his cruell mind.
Of which full proud, himselfe vp rearing hye,
And did suruay his goodly company:
With that the darts which his right +hand+ did straine,
And clapt on hie his coulourd winges twaine,
Tho blinding him againe, his way he forth did take.
to be its object, and "With that" to mean "Whereupon")
Behinde him was _Reproch_, _Repentance_, _Shame_;
_Repentance_ feeble, sorrowfull, and lame:
_Shame_ most ill fauourd, bestiall, and blind:
+_Reproch_+ sharpe stings, +_Repentance_+ whips entwind,
All three to each vnlike, yet all made in one mould.
of italic capital Rs_
And after them a rude confused rout
Emongst them was sterne _Strife_, and _Anger_ stout,
Lewd _Losse of Time_, and _Sorrow_ seeming dead,
Consuming +_Riotise_+, and guilty _Dread_
Vile _Pouertie_, and lastly _Death_ with infamie.
There were full many moe like maladies,
So many moe, as there be phantasies
Or paines in loue, or punishments in hell;
About the chamber +with that+ Damozell,
Into the inner roome, from whence they first did rise.
rather than Amoret_
So soone as they were in, the dore streight way
Which first it opened; +and bore all away.+
In secret shade, and saw both first and last,
To enter in, but found it locked fast:
For to efforce, when charmes had closed it afore.
away _1596_
Where force might not auaile, +there+ sleights and art
For thy from that same roome not to depart
When that same Maske againe should forth arize.
Calling men to their daily exercize,
Out of her secret stand, that day for to out weare.
All that day she outwore in +wandering+,
Till that againe the second euening
Wherewith the worlds faire beautie she hath blent:
That brasen dore flew open, and in went
Neither of idle +shewes+, nor of false charmes aghast.
four watches of three hours each, starting at 6 p.m.)
"yron" at 311.54:7 and 312.3:3}
So soone as she was entred, round about
Of all those persons, which she saw without:
Ne liuing wight she saw in all that roome,
Were bounden fast, that did her ill become,
Vnto a brasen pillour, by the which she stands.
hence: completely, altogether}
And her before the vile Enchaunter sate,
With liuing bloud he those characters wrate,
Seeming transfixed with a cruell dart,
Ah who can loue the worker of her smart?
Yet thousand charmes could not her stedfast heart remoue.
Soone as that virgin knight he saw in place,
Not caring his long labours to deface,
A murdrous knife out of his pocket drew,
In her tormented bodie to embrew:
His cursed hand withheld, and maistered his might.
From her, to whom his fury first he ment,
And turning to +her selfe+ his fell intent,
That little drops empurpled her faire brest.
Albe the wound were nothing deepe imprest,
To giue him the reward for such vile outrage dew.
So mightily she smote him, that to ground
Had not the Lady, which by him stood bound,
From doing him to dy.  For else her paine
Which wrought it, could the same recure againe.
For life she him enuyde, and long'd reuenge to see.
And to him said, Thou wicked man, whose meed
Is death, or if that ought do death exceed,
But if that thou this Dame doe presently
This doe and liue, else die vndoubtedly.
Did yield himselfe right willing to prolong his date.
And rising vp, gan streight to ouerlooke
Full dreadfull things out of that balefull booke
That horror gan the virgins hart to perse,
Hearing him those same bloudy lines reherse;
Her sword high ouer him, if ought he did offend.
Anon she gan perceiue the house to quake,
Yet all that did not her dismaied make,
But still with stedfast eye and courage stout
At last that mightie chaine, which round about
And that great brasen pillour broke in peeces small.
The cruell steele, which thrild her dying hart,
And the wyde wound, which lately did dispart
Was closed vp, as it had not bene +bor'd+,
As she were neuer hurt, was soone restor'd:
And perfect hole, prostrate she fell vnto the ground.
Before faire _Britomart_, she fell prostrate,
Can wretched Lady, quit from wofull state,
Your vertue selfe her owne reward shall breed,
Which I your vassall, by your prowesse freed,
And goodly well aduance, that goodly well was tryde.
But _Britomart_ vprearing her from ground,
For many labours more, then I haue found,
And meane of your deliuerance haue beene:
And put away remembrance of late teene;
Hath no lesse griefe endured for your gentle sake.
She was much cheard to heare him mentiond,
Then laid the noble Championesse strong hond
So sore, and with foule outrages opprest:
He bound that pitteous Lady prisoner, now relest,
And captiue with her led to wretchednesse and wo.
Returning backe, those goodly roomes, which erst
Now vanisht vtterly, and cleane subuerst
That sight of such a chaunge +her+ much dismayd.
Those dreadfull flames she also found delayd,
That erst all entrers wont so cruelly to scorch.
Stanzas 43-5 were first printed in the 1596 edition, replacing stanzas
More easie issew now, then entrance late
Which chokt the porch of that enchaunted gate,
Was vanisht quite, as it were not the same,
Th'Enchaunter selfe, which all that fraud did frame,
Seeing his worke now wasted deepe engrieued was.
But when the victoresse arriued there,
With her owne trusty Squire, both full of feare,
Thereat her noble hart was stonisht sore;
Now gan to feede on hope, which she before
Being thereof beguyld was fild with new affright.
But he sad man, when he had long in drede
Yet saw her not nor signe of her good speed,
Misdeeming sure that her those flames did burne;
Who her deare nourslings losse no lesse did mourne,
Where let them wend at will, whilest here I doe respire.
(End of Book III, Canto xii and of Volume I)
At last she came vnto the place, where late
Twixt dolour and despight halfe desperate,
And of the hardie _Britomarts_ successe:
In wilfull anguish, and dead heauinesse,
Soone as he heard, himself he reared light from ground.
There did he see, that most on earth him ioyd,
Whose too long absence him had sore annoyd,
Straight he vpstarted from the loathed layes,
Like as a Deare, that greedily embayes
Which he in chace endured hath, now nigh breathlesse.
deer}
Lightly he clipt her twixt his armes twaine,
Her body, late the prison of sad paine,
But she faire Lady ouercommen quight
And in sweete rauishment pourd out her spright:
But like two senceles stocks in long embracement dwelt.
Had ye them seene, ye would haue surely thought,
Which that rich _Romane_ of white marble wrought,
So seemd those two, as growne together quite,
Was much empassiond in her gentle sprite,
In vaine she wisht, that fate n'ould let her yet possesse.
the fountain of Salmacis, near Halicarnassus, fell in love with
him but could not win his affections.  One day, as he was bathing
in the fountain, she embraced him and prayed that she might be
united with him for ever.  Her prayer was granted, and their
bodies became one, while retaining the characteristics of either
sex.  See _Met._ 4.285-388.  The statue of which Spenser speaks,
and its owner, have not been identified)
Thus doe those louers with sweet counteruayle,
But now my teme begins to faint and fayle,
Therefore I will their sweatie yokes assoyle
And ye faire Swayns, after your long turmoyle,
Now cease your worke; to morrow is an holy day.
the Muses Clio and Calliope)
travel, or any journey; hence "iournall toil" = "travel",
"progress")
work is suspended; holiday}
A number of words contain contractions which enabled the printer better
to fit the line on the page.  Since these are a device of the printer
rather than the author, the contractions are given in their expanded
form in the text and listed separately here.
Except for the ampersand, the contractions consist of a letter (a, e, o,
or u) with a tilde above it.  In this list, "a-tilde" is shown as
"{a~}".  The long "s" is shown as "/".
The contractions used in the copy text (excluding the introductory
material and stanzas 43-7 of Book III in the 1590 edition) are as
follows:
Contraction        Expands to        Occurrences        Per cent
{a~}               am                  1              0.61
{a~}               an                 10              6.06
{e~}               em                  9              5.45
{e~}               en                 24             14.55
{o~}               om                 14              8.48
{o~}               on                 13              7.88
{u~}               un                  7              4.24
&                 and                 87             52.73
In five places, the ligatured "ss" is used.  This resembles an overlarge
Greek beta, and is shown here as a dollar sign.
Colossians
Daniel
Deuteronomy
Ecclesiastes
Ephesians
Exodus
Galatians
Genesis
Hebrews
Hosea
Isaiah
Job
Gospel According to John
Joshua
Judges
Luke
Matthew
Psalms
Revelation
Romans
Song of Solomon
in Alexander (1951)
Antony and Cleopatra
As You Like It
Cymbeline
Hamlet
Henry VIII
Julius Caesar
King Lear
Macbeth
A Midsummer-night's Dream
Othello
Richard III
Romeo and Juliet
Twelfth Night
Winter's Tale
The Shepheardes Calender
The Faerie Queene
Teares of the Muses
Virgil's Gnat
Mother Hubberds Tale
Ruines of Rome
Muiopotmos
Colin Clouts Come Home Againe
Amoretti
Epithalamion
A Vewe of the present state of Irelande
Quarto of 1590
Quarto of 1596
Folio of 1609
Folio of 1617
Folio of 1679
J. Hughes, 1715
T. Birch, 1751
J. Upton, 1758
R. Church, 1758-9
H. J. Todd, 1805
F. J. Child, 1855
J. P. Collier, 1862
R. Morris, 1869, revised 1896
A. B. Grosart, 1882-4
Kate M. Warren, 1897-1900
Dodge, R. E. N. (1908) _The Complete Poetical Works of Edmund
Spenser_. Boston
Smith, J. C. (1909) _Spenser's Faerie Queene_, Oxford University
Press
Smith, J. C. and E. de Selincourt (1912) _The Poetical Works of
Greenlaw, E. A., F. M. Padelford, C. G. Osgood, et al. (1932-63)
The Works of Edmund Spenser: a Variorum Edition (11
volumes) including: PROSE WORKS (1949),  LIFE (1945)
and INDEX (1963), Oxford University Press, John Hopkins
Press
Greenlaw, E. A., F. M. Padelford, C. G. Osgood, et al. (1966) The
Works of Edmund Spenser: a Variorum Edition, John
Kermode, Frank (1965) Edmund Spenser: Selections from the Minor
Poems and _The Faerie Queene_
Bayley, P. C. (1965) Spenser: _The Faerie Queene_, Book II,
Oxford University Press
Bayley, P. C. (1966) Spenser: _The Faerie Queene_, Book I, Oxford
University Press
Spenser, Edmund (1976) _The Faerie Queene_, Scolar Press, ISBN 0
Morris, R. (1976) _The Faerie Queene_: A Selection, Dent, Dutton,
Hamilton, A. C. (1977) Spenser: _The Faerie Queene_, Longman, 0
Hamilton, A. C. (1980) Spenser: _The Faerie Queene_, Longman, 0
Roche, T. P. and C. P. O'Donnell (1981) Spenser: _The Faerie
Queene_, Yale University Press, ISBN 0 300 02705 2
Jussawalla, M. (1982) Spenser: _The Faerie Queene_, Book I,
Orient Longman, India, ISBN 0 86131 185 X
Brooks-Davies, D. (1987) Spenser: _The Faerie Queene_, Books I-
III, Dent, Dutton, ISBN 0 460 15443 5
Adlington, William (1566) (trans.), _Lucius Apuleius, The Golden
Ass_.  London (Abbey Classics, 1922)
Alexander, P. (1951) (ed.), _William Shakespeare: The Complete
Works_.  London
Apuleius, Lucius: see Adlington, William (1566)
Ariosto, Lodovico (1619) _Orlando Furioso_: see Ceserani (1962),
Hough (1962)
Aristotle: see McKeon (1941)
Bayley, P. C. (1965) _Spenser: The Faerie Queene_, Book II.
Oxford
Bayley, P. C. (1966) _Spenser: The Faerie Queene_, Book I.
Oxford
Boas, F. S. (1908-9) _Poetical Works of Giles Fletcher and
Phineas Fletcher._  Cambridge
Brewer, E. Cobham (1894) _The Dictionary of Phrase and Fable_.
London
Brooks-Davies, D. (1987) Spenser: _The Faerie Queene_, Books I-
III.  London
Camden, William (1586) _Britannia_ (trans. Philemon Holland
Camden, William (1605) _Remains Concerning Britain_ (1674
edition, ed. John Philipot, Library of Old Authors,
Carey, John, and Alastair Fowler (1968) (ed.), _John Milton: The
Complete Poems_.  London
Ceserani, R. (1962) (ed.), Ariosto: _Orlando Furioso_.  Turin
Cheney, Donald (1966) _Spenser's Image of Nature: wild man and
shepherd in the "Faerie Queene"_.  New Haven
Clarendon Press (1989) _The Oxford English Dictionary_, 2nd
edition, Oxford
Comes, Natale (1616) _Mythologiae, sive explicationis fabularum,
libri decem_.  Padua
Cooper, Thomas (1565) _Thesaurus Linguae Romanae et Britannicae_
Dodge, R. E. N. (1908) _The Complete Poetical Works of Edmund
Spenser_.  Boston
Drayton, Michael, _Complete Works_: see Hebel (1961)
Elyot, Sir Thomas (1534) _The Castel of Helth_.  London
Evans, S. (trans.), rev. C. W. Dunn (1958) Geoffrey of Monmouth's
_Historia Regum Britanniae_.  New York
Fletcher, Giles and Phineas: see Boas (1908-9)
Fowler, Alastair (1971) (ed.), _John Milton: Paradise Lost_.
London
Genders, Roy (1971) _The Scented Wild Flowers of Britain_.
London
Gerard, John (1597) _The Herball or General Historie of Plantes_.
London (and the 2nd edition of 1633)
Gilbert, Allan H. (1941) Modern Language Notes 56:594-7
Giles, J. A. (1891) (ed.), _Six Old English Chronicles_.  London
Grant, Michael (1960) (ed.) _Cicero: Selected Works_.  London
Greenlaw, E. A., F. M. Padelford, C. G. Osgood, et al. (1932-63)
_The Works of Edmund Spenser: a Variorum Edition_.
Oxford
Guessard, F. and C. Grandmaison (1860) (ed.) _Huon de Bordeaux_.
Paris
Guterman, N. (trans). (1951) (ed. Jolande Jacobi), _Paracelsus:
Selected Writings_.  London
Hamilton, A. C. (1980) _Spenser: The Faerie Queene_.  London
Harper (1910) _The Sources of the British Chronicle History in
Spenser's "Faerie Queene"_.  Philadelphia
Hebel (1961) _The Complete Works of Michael Drayton_.  Oxford
Holinshed, Raphael (1577, 1587) _Chronicles of England, Scotland,
and Ireland_.  London
Horace: see Michie (1964)
Hough, Graham (1962) (ed.) Ariosto: _Orlando Furioso_.  Arundel
Johnson, Richard (1592).  _The Seven Champions of Christendom_.
London
Jortin, J. (1734) _Remarks on Spenser's Poems_.  London
Jowett, B. (1973) _Plato: the Republic and Other Works_.  New
York
Jussawalla, M. (1982) _Spenser: The Faerie Queene, Book I_.
Calcutta
Kermode, Frank (1965) _Edmund Spenser: Selections from the Minor
Poems and The Faerie Queene_
Latham, A. M. C. (1951) _Sir Walter Raleigh: Poems_.  London
Lewis, C. S. (1967) (ed. Fowler), _Spenser's Images of Life_.
London
Martin, Ernest (1882-7) (publ.) _Le Roman de Renart_.  Strasbourg
McKeon, R. (1941) (ed.), _Basic Works of Aristotle_.  New York
Michie, James (1964) (trans.) _The Odes of Horace_.  London
Milton, John (1667) _Paradise Lost_: see Fowler (1971)
Milton, John (1637) _Comus_: see Carey and Fowler (1968)
Monmouth, Geoffrey of, _Historia Regum Britanniae_: see Giles
(1891)
Morris, R. (1869) (ed.), _The Works of Edmund Spenser_.  London
Morris, R. (1910) (ed.), _The Faerie Queene_ (from Morris 1869).
London
Ordnance Survey, The (1987) _The Ordnance Survey Gazetteer of
Great Britain_.  Southampton, London and Basingstoke
Paracelsus: see Guterman (1951)
Plato: see Jowett (1973)
Raleigh, Walter, _The Ocean's Love to Cynthia_: see Latham (1951)
Robinson, F. N. (1957) (ed.) _The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer_.
Boston and London
Roche, T. P. and C. P. O'Donnell (1981) Spenser: _The Faerie
Queene_.  London
Shakespeare: see Alexander (1951)
Shepherd, G. (1965) (ed.), _An Apology for Poetry_.  London
Shire, H. (1978) _A Preface to Spenser_.  London
Sidney, Sir Philip (1595) _An Apology for Poetry_: see Shepherd
(1965)
Smith, J. C. (1909) _Spenser's Faerie Queene_.  Oxford
Smith, J. C. and E. de Selincourt (1912) _The Poetical Works of
Edmund Spenser_.  Oxford
Tasso, Torquato (1581) _Gerusalemme Liberata_: see Weiss (1962)
_The Times Index-Gazetteer of the World_ (1965).  London
Warton, T. (1754), _Observations on "The Faerie Queene"._  London
Weiss, R. (1962) (ed.) Tasso: _Gerusalemme Liberata_.  Arundel
This comprises (1) a table of important dates in the life of Spenser, and (2)
a biography Edmund Spenser taken verbatim from the 1896 Macmillan Globe
edition of Spenser's collected works, edited by R. Morris.  It is by John W.
Hales.
Footnotes are grouped together at the end of the file.
?1552   Born at East Smithfield, London.
Taylors' School, headmaster Richard Mulcaster.
Petrarch_ and _Visions of Bellay_ to Van der Noodt's _Theatre of
Worldlings_; enters Pembroke Hall (College), Cambridge.
former Master of Pembroke Hall.
of _The Faerie Queene_ already under way.  5 December: _The
Shepheardes Calender_ entered in Stationers' Register.
Shepheardes Calender_ and of correspondence with Gabriel Harvey.
Appointed secretary to Lord Grey, Lord Deputy of Ireland.  In
?August, to Dublin with Lord Grey.  In November, apparently
witnesses the siege and massacre at Smerwick, in Munster.
as his secretary.  Spenser leases a house in Dublin, and a
country residence: New Abbey at Kilcullen, 25 miles from Dublin.
Birth of his son Sylvanus.
a period of two years.
Lodowick Bryskett.  ?Birth of daughter Katherine; ?death of
Machabyas Chylde.
of Mallow in County Cork; does not take up residence until 1588
or 1589.  (Death of Sir Philip Sidney.)
Armada.)
with Raleigh to England.  Audience with the Queen.  1 December:
the _Faerie Queene_ entered in Stationers' Register.
against him begun by Lord Roche.
_Daphnaida_.  Returns to Kilcolman.  Composition of _Colin
Clouts Come Come Again_.  25 February: granted annual pension of
{pounds}50 by the Queen.
marries Elizabeth Boyle.
_Amoretti_ and _Epithalamion_ in one volume.  Birth of his son
Peregrine.
Queene_, Books I-VI, _Fowre Hymns_, and _Prothalamion_.  12
November: King James of Scotland claims that the portrayal of
Duessa in the _Faerie Queene_ is a libel on his mother, Mary,
Queen of Scots; outcome of this claim not known.  (Essex raids
Cadiz.)
also purchases Buttevant Abbey.
entered in Stationers' Register but not passed for printing.
Spenser recommended for appointment as Sheriff of Cork.
October: Tyrone's rebellion in Munster; Spenser's castle at
Kilcolman sacked and burnt.  In December, Spenser in London.
incorporating Books I-VI and _Two Cantos of Mutabilitie_.
Revised 1896
From the Macmillan Globe edition of
Ille velut fidis arcana sodalibus olim
Credebat libris; neque, si male cesserat, unquam
Decurrens alio, neque si bene; quo fit ut omnis
Votiva pateat veluti descripta tabella
Vita senis.
Hither, as to their fountain, other stars
Repairing in their urns draw golden light.
The life of Spenser is wrapt in a similar obscurity to
that which hides from us his great predecessor Chaucer,
and his still greater contemporary Shakspere.  As in
the case of Chaucer, our principal external authorities
are a few meagre entries in certain official documents,
and such facts as may be gathered from his works.  The
birth-year of each poet is determined by inference.
The circumstances in which each died are a matter of
controversy.  What sure information we have of the
intervening events of the life of each one is scanty
and interrupted.  So far as our knowledge goes, it
shows some slight positive resemblance between their
lives.  They were both connected with the highest
society of their times; both enjoyed court favour, and
enjoyed it in the substantial shape of pensions.  They
were both men of remarkable learning.  They were both
natives of London.  They both died in the close
vicinity of Westminster Abbey, and lie buried near each
other in that splendid cemetery.  Their geniuses were
eminently different: that of Chaucer was the active
type, Spenser's of the contemplative; Chaucer was
dramatic, Spenser philosophical; Chaucer objective,
Spenser subjective; but in the external circumstances,
so far as we know them, amidst which these great poets
moved, and in the mist which for the most part enfolds
those circumstances, there is considerable likeness.
Spenser is frequently alluded to by his
contemporaries; they most ardently recognised in him,
as we shall see, a great poet, and one that might
justly be associated with the one supreme poet whom
this country had then produced--with Chaucer, and they
paid him constant tributes of respect and admiration;
but these mentions of him do not generally supply any
biographical details.
The earliest notice of him that may in any sense
be termed biographical occurs in a sort of handbook to
the monuments of Westminster Abbey, published by Camden
in 1606.  Amongst the 'Reges, Regin{ae}, Nobiles, et alij
in Ecclesia Collegiata B. Petri Westmonasterii sepulti
usque ad annum 1606' is enrolled the name of Spenser,
with the following brief obituary:
'Edmundus Spencer Londinensis, Anglicorum Poetarum
nostri seculi facile princeps, quod ejus poemata
faventibus Musis et victuro genio conscripta
comprobant.  Obijt immatura morte anno salutis 1598, et
prope Galfredum Chaucerum conditur qui felicissime
po{e"}sin Anglicis literis primus illustravit.  In quem
h{ae}c scripta sunt epitaphia:--
Hic prope Chaucerum situs est Spenserius, illi
Proximus ingenio proximus ut tumulo.
Hic prope Chaucerum, Spensere poeta, poetam
Conderis, et versu quam tumulo propior.
Anglica, te vivo, vixit plausitque po{e"}sis;
Nunc moritura timet, te moriente, mori.'
'Edmund Spencer of London, far the first of the
English Poets of our age, as his poems prove, written
under the smile of the Muses, and with a genius
destined to live.  He died prematurely in the year of
salvation 1598, and is buried near Geoffrey Chaucer,
who was the first most happily to set forth poetry in
English writing: and on him were written these
epitaphs:--
Here nigh to Chaucer Spenser lies; to whom
In genius next he was, as now in tomb.
Here nigh to Chaucer, Spenser, stands thy
hearse,{1}
Still nearer standst thou to him in thy verse.
Whilst thou didst live, lived English poetry;
Now thou art dead, it fears that it shall die.'
The next notice is found in Drummond's account of
Ben Jonson's conversations with him in the year 1618:
'Spencer's stanzas pleased him not, nor his
matter.  The meaning of the allegory of his Fairy Queen
he had delivered in writing to Sir Walter Rawleigh,
which was, "that by the Bleating Beast he understood
the Puritans, and by the false Duessa the Queen of
Scots."  He told, that Spencer's goods were robbed by
the Irish, and his house and a little child burnt, he
and his wife escaped, and after died for want of bread
in King Street; he refused 20 pieces sent to him by my
lord Essex, and said he was sure he had no time to
spend them.'{2}
The third record occurs in Camden's _History of
Queen Elizabeth (Annales rerum Anglicarum et
Hibernicarum regnante Elizabetha)_, first published in
a complete form in 1628.  There the famous antiquary
registering what demises marked the year 1598 (our
March 25, 1598, to March 24, 1599), adds to his list
Edmund Spenser, and thus writes of him: 'Ed. Spenserus,
patria Londinensis, Cantabrigienis autem alumnus, Musis
adeo arridentibus natus ut omnes Anglicos superioris
{ae}vi Poetas, ne Chaucero quidem concive excepto,
superaret.  Sed peculiari Poetis fato semper cum
paupertate conflictatus, etsi Greio Hiberni{ae} proregi
fuerit ab epistolis.  Vix enim ibi secessum et
scribendi otium nactus, quam a rebellibus {e\} laribus
ejectus et bonis spoliatus, in Angliam inops reversus
statim exspiravit, Westmonasterii prope Chaucerum
impensis comitis Essexi{ae} inhumatus, Po{e"}tis funus
ducentibus flebilibusque carminibus et calamis in
tumulum conjectis.'{3}  This is to say: 'Edmund
Spenser, a Londoner by birth, and a scholar also of the
University of Cambridge, born under so favourable an
aspect of the Muses that he surpassed all the English
Poets of former times, not excepting Chaucer himself,
his fellow-citizen.  But by a fate which still follows
Poets, he always wrestled with poverty, though he had
been secretary to the Lord Grey, Lord Deputy of
Ireland.  For scarce had he there settled himself into
a retired privacy and got leisure to write, when he was
by the rebels thrown out of his dwelling, plundered of
his goods, and returned to England a poor man, where he
shortly after died and was interred at Westminster,
near to Chaucer, at the charge of the Earl of Essex,
his hearse being attended by poets, and mournful
elegies and poems with the pens that wrote them thrown
into his tomb.'{4}
In 1633, Sir James Ware prefaced his edition of
Spenser's prose work on the State of Ireland with these
remarks:--
'How far these collections may conduce to the
knowledge of the antiquities and state of this land,
let the fit reader judge: yet something I may not passe
by touching Mr. Edmund Spenser and the worke it selfe,
lest I should seeme to offer injury to his worth, by
others so much celebrated.  Hee was borne in London of
an ancient and noble family, and brought up in the
Universitie of Cambridge, where (as the fruites of his
after labours doe manifest) he mispent not his time.
After this he became secretary to Arthur Lord Grey of
Wilton, Lord Deputy of Ireland, a valiant and worthy
governour, and shortly after, for his services to the
Crowne, he had bestowed upon him by Queene Elizabeth,
finished the latter part of that excellent poem of his
"Faery Queene," which was soone after unfortunately
lost by the disorder and abuse of his servant, whom he
had sent before him into England, being then _a
rebellibus_ (as Camden's words are) _{e\} laribus ejectus
et bonis spoliatus_.  He deceased at Westminster in the
year 1599 (others have it wrongly 1598), soon after his
return into England, and was buried according to his
own desire in the collegiat church there, neere unto
Chaucer whom he worthily imitated (at the costes of
Robert Earle of Essex), whereupon this epitaph was
framed.'  And then are quoted the epigrams already
given from Camden.
The next passage that can be called an account of
Spenser is found in Fuller's _Worthies of England_,
first published in 1662, and runs as follows:--
'Edmond Spencer, born in this city (London), was
brought up in Pembroke-hall in Cambridge, where he
became an excellent scholar; but especially most happy
in English Poetry; as his works do declare, in which
the many Chaucerisms used (for I will not say affected
by him) are thought by the ignorant to be blemishes,
known by the learned to be beauties, to his book; which
notwithstanding had been more saleable, if more
conformed to our modern language.
'There passeth a story commonly told and believed,
that Spencer presenting his poems to queen Elizabeth,
she, highly affected therewith, commanded the lord
Cecil, her treasurer, to give him an hundred pound; and
when the treasurer (a good steward of the queen's
money) alledged that the sum was too much; "Then give
him," quoth the queen, "What is reason;" to which the
lord consented, but was so busied, belike, about
matters of higher concernment, that Spencer received no
reward, whereupon he presented this petition in a small
piece of paper to the queen in her progress:--
I was promis'd on a time,
To have reason for my rhyme;
From that time unto this season,
I receiv'd nor rhyme nor reason.
'Hereupon the queen gave strict order (not without some
check to her treasurer), for the present payment of the
hundred pounds the first intended unto him.
'He afterwards went over into Ireland, secretary
to the lord Gray, lord deputy thereof; and though that
his office under his lord was lucrative, yet he got no
estate; but saith my author "peculiari poetis fato
semper cum paupertate conflictatus est."  So that it
fared little better with him than with William Xilander
the German (a most excellent linguist, antiquary,
philosopher and mathematician), who was so poor, that
(as Thuanus saith), he was thought "fami non famae
scribere."
'Returning into England, he was robb'd by the
rebels of what little he had; and dying for grief in
great want, anno 1598, was honourably buried nigh
Chaucer in Westminster, where this distich concludeth
his epitaph on his monument
Anglica, te vivo, vixit plausitque poesis;
Nunc moritura timet, te moriente, mori.'
Whilst thou didst live, liv'd English poetry
Which fears now thou art dead, that she shall die.
'Nor must we forget, that the expence of his funeral
and monument was defrayed at the sole charge of Robert,
first of that name, earl of Essex.'
The next account is given by Edward Phillips in
his _Theatrum Po{e"}tarum Anglicanorum_, first published
in 1675.  This Phillips was, as is well known, Milton's
nephew, and according to Warton, in his edition of
Milton's juvenile poems, 'there is good reason to
suppose that Milton threw many additions and
corrections into the _Theatrum Po{e"}tarum_.'  Phillips'
words therefore have an additional interest for us.
'Edmund Spenser,' he writes, 'the first of our English
poets that brought heroic poesy to any perfection, his
"Fairy Queen" being for great invention and poetic
heighth, judg'd little inferior, if not equal to the
chief of the ancient Greeks and Latins, or modern
Italians; but the first poem that brought him into
esteem was his "Shepherd's Calendar," which so endeared
him to that noble patron of all vertue and learning Sir
Philip Sydney, that he made him known to Queen
Elizabeth, and by that means got him preferred to be
secretary to his brother{5} Sir Henry Sidney, who was
sent deputy into Ireland, where he is said to have
written his "Faerie Queen;" but upon the return of Sir
Henry, his employment ceasing, he also return'd into
England, and having lost his great friend Sir Philip,
fell into poverty, yet made his last refuge to the
Queen's bounty, and had 500_l_. ordered him for his
support, which nevertheless was abridged to 100_l_. by
Cecil, who, hearing of it, and owing him a grudge for
some reflections in Mother Hubbard's Tale, cry'd out to
the queen, What! all this for a song?  This he is said
to have taken so much to heart, that he contracted a
deep melancholy, which soon after brought his life to a
period.  So apt is an ingenuous spirit to resent a
slighting, even from the greatest persons; thus much I
must needs say of the merit of so great a poet from so
great a monarch, that as it is incident to the best of
poets sometimes to flatter some royal or noble patron,
never did any do it more to the height, or with greater
art or elegance, if the highest of praises attributed
to so heroic a princess can justly be termed
flattery.'{6}
When Spenser's works were reprinted--the first
three books of the _Faerie Queene_ for the seventh
time--in 1679, there was added an account of his life.
In 1687, Winstanley, in his _Lives of the most famous
English Poets_, wrote a formal biography.
These are the oldest accounts of Spenser that have
been handed down to us.  In several of them mythical
features and blunders are clearly discernible.  Since
Winstanley's time, it may be added, Hughes in 1715, Dr.
Birch in 1731, Church in 1758, Upton in that same year,
Todd in 1805, Aikin in 1806, Robinson in 1825, Mitford
in 1839, Prof. Craik in 1845, Prof. Child in 1855, Mr.
Collier in 1862, Dr. Grosart in 1884, have re-told what
little there is to tell, with various additions and
subtractions.
Our external sources of information are, then,
extremely scanty.  Fortunately our internal sources are
somewhat less meagre.  No poet ever more emphatically
lived in his poetry than did Spenser.  The Muses were,
so to speak, his own bosom friends, to whom he opened
all his heart.  With them he conversed perpetually on
the various events of his life; into their ears he
poured forth constantly the tale of his joys and his
sorrows, of his hopes, his fears, his distresses.
He was not one of those poets who can put off
themselves in their works, who can forego their own
interests and passions, and live for the time an
extraneous life.  There is an intense personality about
all his writings, as in those of Milton and of
Wordsworth.  In reading them you can never forget the
poet in the poem.  They directly and fully reflect the
poet's own nature and his circumstances.  They are, as
it were, fine spiritual diaries, refined self-
portraitures.  Horace's description of his own famous
fore-runner, quoted at the head of this memoir, applies
excellently to Spenser.  On this account the scantiness
of our external means of knowing Spenser is perhaps the
less to be regretted.  Of him it is eminently true that
we may know him from his works.  His poems are his best
biography.  In the sketch of his life to be given here
his poems shall be our one great authority.
Footnotes
---------
{1} Compare 'Underneath this sable _hearse_, &c.'
{2} Works of William Drummond of Hawthornden.
Edinburgh, 1711, p. 225.
{3} _Annales_, ed. _Hearne_, iii. 783.
{4} _History of Elizabeth, Queen of England._  Ed.
{5} Father
{6} _Theatrum Poet. Anglic._, ed. Brydges, 1800, pp.
Edmund Spenser was born in London in the year 1552, or
possibly 1551.  For both these statements we have
directly or indirectly his own authority.  In his
_Prothalamion_ he sings of certain swans whom in a
vision he saw floating down the river 'Themmes,' that
At length they all to mery London came,
To mery London, my most kyndly nurse,
That to me gave this lifes first native sourse,
Though from another place I take my name,
An house of auncient fame.
A MS. note by Oldys the antiquary in Winstanley's
_Lives of the most famous English Poets_, states that
the precise locality of his birth was East Smithfield.
East Smithfield lies just to the east of the Tower, and
in the middle of the sixteenth century, when the Tower
was still one of the chief centres of London life and
importance, was of course a neighbourhood of far
different rank and degree from its present social
status.  The date of his birth is concluded with
sufficient certainty from one of his sonnets, viz.
sonnet 60; which it is pretty well ascertained was
composed in the year 1593.  These sonnets are, as well
shall see, of the amorous wooing sort; in the one of
them just mentioned, the sighing poet declares that it
is but a year since he fell in love, but that the year
has seemed to him longer
Then al those fourty which my life out-went.
Hence it is gathered that he was most probably born in
Westminster Abbey errs in assigning his birth to 1553;
though the error is less flagrant than that perpetrated
by the inscription that preceded the present one, which
set down as his natal year 1510.
Of his parents the only fact secured is that his
mother's name was Elizabeth.  This appears from sonnet
Most happy letters! fram'd by skilfull trade
With which that happy name was first desynd,
The which three times thrise happy hath me made,
With guifts of body, fortune and of mind.
The first my being to me gave by kind
From mothers womb deriv'd by dew descent.
The second is the Queen, the third 'my love, my lives
last ornament.'  A careful examination by Mr. Collier
and others of what parish registers there are extant in
such old churches as stand near East Smithfield--the
Great Fire, it will be remembered, broke out some
distance west of the Tower, and raged mainly westward--
has failed to discover any trace of the infant Spenser
or his parents.  An 'Edmund Spenser' who is mentioned
in the Books of the Treasurer of the Queen's Chamber in
Norris, her Majesty's ambassador in France, to the
Queen,{1} and who with but slight probability has been
surmised to be the poet himself, is scarcely more
plausibly conjectured by Mr. Collier to be the poet's
father.  The utter silence about his parents, with the
single exception quoted, in the works of one who, as
has been said above, made poetry the confidante of all
his joys and sorrows, is remarkable.
Whoever they were, he was well connected on his
father's side at least.  'The nobility of the
Spensers,' writes Gibbon, 'has been illustrated and
enriched by the trophies of Marlborough; but I exhort
them to consider the "Faerie Queen" as the most
precious jewel of their coronet.'  Spenser was
connected with the then not ennobled, but highly
influential family of the Spencers of Althorpe,
Northamptonshire.  Theirs was the 'house of auncient
fame,' or perhaps we should rather say they too
belonged to the 'house of auncient fame' alluded to in
the quotation made above from the _Prothalamion_.  He
dedicates various poems to the daughters of Sir John
Spencer, who was the head of that family during the
poet's youth and earlier manhood down to 1580, and in
other places mentions these ladies with many
expressions of regard and references to his affinity.
'Most faire and vertuous Ladie,' he writes to the
'Ladie Compton and Mountegle,' the fifth daughter, in
his dedication to her of his _Mother Hubberds Tale_,
'having often sought opportunitie by some good meanes
to make knowen to your Ladiship the humble affection
and faithfull duetie, which I have alwaies professed
and am bound to beare to that house, from whence yee
spring, I have at length found occasion to remember the
same by making a simple present to you of these my idle
labours, &c.'  To another daughter, 'the right worthy
and vertuous ladie the Ladie Carey,' he dedicates his
_Muiopotmos_; to another, 'the right honorable the
Ladie Strange,' his _Teares of the Muses_.  In the
latter dedication he speaks of 'your particular
bounties, and also some private bands of affinitie,
which it hath pleased your Ladiship to acknowledge.'
It was for this lady Strange, who became subsequently
the wife of Sir Thomas Egerton, that one who came after
Spenser--Milton--wrote the _Arcades_.  Of these three
kinswomen, under the names of Phyllis, Charillis, and
sweet Amaryllis, Spenser speaks once more in his _Colin
Clouts Come Home Again_; he speaks of them as
The honour of the noble familie
Of which I meanest boast myself to be.
For the particular branch of the Spencer or Spenser
family--one branch wrote the name with _s_, another
with _c_--to which the poet belonged, it has been well
suggested that it was that settled in East Lancashire
in the neighbourhood of Pendle Forest.  It is known on
the authority of his friend Kirke, whom we shall
mention again presently, that Spenser retired to the
North after leaving Cambridge; traces of a Northern
dialect appear in the _Shepheardes Calendar_; the
Christian name Edmund is shown by the parish registers
to have been a favourite with one part of the
Lancashire branch--with that located near Filley Close,
three miles north of Hurstwood, near Burnley.
Spenser then was born in London, probably in East
Smithfield, about a year before those hideous Marian
fires began to blaze in West Smithfield.  He had at
least one sister, and probably at least one brother.
His memory would begin to be retentive about the time
of Queen Elizabeth's accession.  Of his great
contemporaries, with most of whom he was to be brought
eventually into contact, Raleigh was born at Hayes in
Devonshire in the same year with him, Camden in Old
Bailey in 1551, Hooker near Exeter in or about 1553,
Sidney at Penshurst in 1554, Bacon at York House in the
West Strand, 1561, Shakspere at Stratford-on-Avon in
in 1567.
The next assured fact concerning Spenser is that
he was educated at the Merchant Taylors' School, then
just founded.  This we learn from an entry in 'The
Spending of the Money of Robert Nowell, Esq.,' of Reade
Hall, Lancashire, brother of Alexander Nowell, Dean of
St. Paul's.  In an accompt of sums 'geven to poor
schollers of dyvers gramare scholles' we find Xs.
given, April 28, 1569, to 'Edmond Spensore Scholler of
the Merchante Tayler Scholl;' and the identification is
established by the occasion being described as 'his
gowinge to Penbrocke Hall in Chambridge,' for we know
that the future poet was admitted a Sizar of Pembroke
College, then styled Hall, Cambridge, in 1569.  Thus we
may fairly conclude that Spenser was not only London
born but London bred, though he may have from time to
time sojourned with relatives and connections in
Lancashire{2} before his undergraduateship, as well as
after.  Thus a conjecture of Mr. Collier's may
confidently be discarded, who in the muster-book of a
hundred in Warwickshire has noted the record of one
Edmund Spenser as living in 1569 at Kingsbury, and
conjectures that this was the poet's father, and that
perhaps the poet spent his youth in the same county
with Shakspere.  It may be much doubted whether it is a
just assumption that every Edmund Spenser that is in
any way or anywhere mentioned in the Elizabethan era
was either the poet or his father.  Nor, should it be
allowed that the Spenser of Kingsbury was indeed the
poet's father, could we reasonably indulge in any
pretty picture of a fine friendship between the future
authors of _Hamlet_ and of the _Faerie Queene_.
Shakspere was a mere child, not yet passed into the
second of his Seven Ages, when Spenser, being then
about seventeen years old, went up to the University.
However, this matter need not be further considered, as
there is no evidence whatever to connect Spenser with
Warwickshire.
But in picturing to ourselves Spenser's youth we
must not think of London as it now is, or of East
Smithfield as now cut off from the country by
innumerable acres of bricks and mortar.  The green
fields at that time were not far away from Spenser's
birthplace.  And thus, not without knowledge and
symnpathy, but with appreciative variations, Spenser
could re-echo Marot's 'Eglogue au Roy sous les noms de
Pan et Robin,' and its descriptions of a boy's rural
wanderings and delights.  See his _Shepheardes
Calendar_, December:--
Whilome in youth when flowrd my joyfull spring,
Like swallow swift I wandred here and there;
For heate of heedlesse lust me did so sting,
That I oft doubted daunger had no feare:
I went the wastefull woodes and forrest wide
Withouten dread of wolves to bene espide.
I wont to raunge amid the mazie thicket
And gather nuttes to make my Christmas game,
And joyed oft to chace the trembling pricket,
Or hunt the hartlesse hare till she were tame.
What wreaked I of wintrie ages waste?
Tho deemed I my spring would ever last.
How often have I scaled the craggie oke
All to dislodge the raven of her nest?
How have I wearied, with many a stroke,
The stately walnut-tree, the while the rest,
Under the tree fell all for nuttes at strife?
For like to me was libertie and life.
To be sure he is here paraphrasing, and also is writing
in the language of pastoral poetry, that is, the
language of this passage is metaphorical; but it is
equally clear that the writer was intimately and
thoroughly acquainted with that life from which the
metaphors of his original are drawn.  He describes a
life he had lived.
It seems probable that he was already an author in
some sort when he went up to Cambridge.  In the same
year in which he became an undergraduate there appeared
a work entitled, 'A Theatre wherein be represented as
well the Miseries and Calamities that follow the
Voluptuous Worldlings as also the greate Joyes and
Pleasures which the Faithful do enjoy.  An Argument
both Profitable and Delectable to all that sincerely
loue the Word of God.  Deuised by S. John Vander
Noodt.'  Vander Noodt was a native of Brabant who had
sought refuge in England, 'as well for that I would not
beholde the abominations of the Romyshe Antechrist as
to escape the handes of the bloudthirsty.'  'In the
meane space,' he continues, 'for the avoyding of
idlenesse (the very mother and nourice of all vices) I
have among other my travayles bene occupied aboute thys
little Treatyse, wherein is sette forth the vilenesse
and basenesse of worldely things whiche commonly
withdrawe us from heavenly and spirituall matters.'
This work opens with six pieces in the form of sonnets
styled epigrams, which are in fact identical with the
first six of the _Visions of Petrarch_ subsequently
published among Spenser's works, in which publication
they are said to have been 'formerly translated'.
After these so-called epigrams come fifteen _Sonnets_,
eleven of which are easily recognisable amongst the
_Visions of Bellay_, published along with the _Visions
of Petrarch_.  There is indeed as little difference
between the two sets of poems as is compatible with the
fact that the old series is written in blank verse, the
latter in rhyme.  The sonnets which appear for the
first time in the _Visions_ are those describing the
Wolf, the River, the Vessel, the City.  There are four
pieces of the older series which are not reproduced in
the later.  It would seem probable that they too may
have been written by Spenser in the days of his youth,
though at a later period of his life he cancelled and
superseded them.  They are therefore reprinted in this
volume.  (See pp. 699-701.)
Vander Noodt, it must be said, makes no mention of
Spenser in his volume.  It would seem that he did not
know English, and that he wrote his _Declaration_--a
sort of commentary in prose on the _Visions_--in
French.  At least we are told that this _Declaration_
is translated out of French into English by Theodore
Roest.  All that is stated of the origin of his
_Visions_ is: 'The learned poete M. Francisce
Petrarche, gentleman of Florence, did invent and write
in Tuscan the six firste . . . . which because they
serve wel to our purpose, I have out of the Brabants
speache turned them into the English tongue;' and 'The
other ten visions next ensuing ar described of one
Ioachim du Bellay, gentleman of France, the whiche
also, because they serve to our purpose I have
translated them out of Dutch into English.'  The fact
of the _Visions_ being subsequently ascribed to Spenser
would not by itself carry much weight.  But, as Prof.
Craik pertinently asks, 'if this English version was
printer who issued that subsequent publication which
not mere typographical errata, and the additions and
other variations{3} that are found in his edition?'
In a work called _Tragical Tales_, published in
to 'Spencer' by George Turberville, then resident in
Russia as secretary to the English ambassador, Sir
Thomas Randolph.  Anthony {a\} Wood says this Spencer was
the poet; but it can scarcely have been so.
'Turberville himself,' remarks Prof. Craik, 'is
supposed to have been at this time in his twenty-ninth
or thirtieth year, which is not the age at which men
choose boys of sixteen for their friends.  Besides, the
verses seem to imply a friendship of some standing, and
also in the person addressed the habits and social
position of manhood. . . .  It has not been commonly
noticed that this epistle from Russia is not
Turberville's only poetical address to his friend
Spencer.  Among his "Epitaphs and Sonnets" are two
other pieces of verse addressed to the same person.'
To the year 1569 belongs that mention referred to
above of payment made one 'Edmund Spenser' for bearing
letters from France.  As has been already remarked, it
is scarcely probable that this can have been the poet,
then a youth of some seventeen years on the verge of
his undergraduateship.
The one certain event of Spenser's life in the
year 1569 is that he was then entered as a sizar at
Pembroke Hall, Cambridge.  He 'proceeded B.A.' in 1573,
and 'commenced M.A.' in 1576.  There is some reason for
believing that his college life was troubled in much
the same way as was that of Milton some sixty years
later--that there prevailed some misunderstanding
between him and the scholastic authorities.  He
mentions his university with respect in the _Faerie
Queene_, in book iv. canto xi. where, setting forth
what various rivers gathered happily together to
celebrate the marriage of the Thames and the Medway, he
tells how
... the plenteous Ouse came far from land
By many a city and by many a towne,
And many rivers taking under hand
Into his waters, as he passeth downe,
The Cle, the Were, the Grant, the Sture, the Rowne.
Thence doth by Huntingdon and Cambridge flit,
My mother Cambridge, whom as with a Crowne
He doth adorne, and is adorn'd of it
With many a gentle Muse, and many a learned wit.
But he makes no mention of his college.  The notorious
Gabriel Harvey, an intimate friend of Spenser, who was
elected a Fellow of Pembroke Hall the year after the
future poet was admitted as a sizar, in a letter
written in 1580, asks: 'And wil you needes have my
testimoniall of youre old Controllers new behaviour?'
and then proceeds to heap abusive words on some person
not mentioned by name but evidently only too well known
to both the sender and the receiver of the epistle.
Having compiled a list of scurrilities worthy of
Falstaff, and attacked another matter which was an
abomination to him, Harvey vents his wrath in sundry
Latin charges, one of which runs: 'C{ae}tera fer{e\}, ut
olim: Bellum inter capita et membra continuatum.'
'Other matters are much as they were: war kept up
quitted his college, with all its miserable bickerings,
after he had taken his master's degree.  There can be
little doubt, however, that he was most diligent and
earnest student during his residence at Cambridge;
during that period, for example, he must have gained
that knowledge of Plato's works which so distinctly
marks his poems, and found in that immortal writer a
spirit most truly congenial.  But it is conceivable
that he pursued his studies after his own manner, and
probably enough excited by his independence the strong
disapprobation of the master and tutor of the college
of his day.
Among his contemporaries in his own college were
Lancelot Andrews, afterwards Master, and eventually
Bishop of Winchester, the famous preacher; Gabriel
Harvey, mentioned above, with whom he formed a fast
friendship, and Edward Kirke, the 'E.K.' who, as will
be seen, introduced to the world Spenser's first work
of any pretence.  Amongst his contemporaries in the
university were Preston, author of _Cambyses_, and
Still, author of _Gammer Gurtons Needle_, with each of
whom he was acquainted.  The friend who would seem to
have exercised the most influence over him was Gabriel
Harvey; but this influence, at least in literary
matters, was by no means for the best.  Harvey was some
three or four years the senior, and of some academic
distinction.  Probably he may be taken as something
more than a fair specimen of the average scholarship
and culture given by the universities at that time.  He
was an extreme classicist; all his admiration was for
classical models and works that savoured of them; he it
was who headed the attempt made in England to force
upon a modern language the metrical system of the
Greeks and Latins. What baneful influence he exercised
over Spenser in this last respect will be shown
presently.  Kirke was Spenser's other close friend; he
was one year junior academically to the poet.  He too,
as we shall see, was a profound admirer of Harvey.
After leaving the university in 1576, Spenser,
then, about twenty-four years of age, returned to his
own people in the North.  This fact is learnt from his
friend 'E.K.'s' glosses to certain lines in the sixth
book of the _Shepheardes Calendar_.  E.K. speaks 'of
the North countrye where he dwelt,' and 'of his
removing out of the North parts and coming into the
South.'  As E.K. writes in the spring of 1579, and as
his writing is evidently some little time subsequent to
the migration he speaks of, it may be believed that
Spenser quitted his Northern home in 1577, and, as we
shall see, there is other evidence for this
supposition.  About a year then was passed in the North
after he left the University.
These years were not spent idly.  The poetical
fruits of them shall be mentioned presently.  What made
it otherwise a memorable year to the poet was his
falling deeply in love with some fair Northern
neighbour.  Who she was is not known.  He who adored
her names her Rosalind, 'a feigned name,' notes E.K.,
'which being well ordered will bewray the very name of
hys love and mistresse, whom by that name he
coloureth.'  Many solutions of this anagram have been
essayed, mostly on the supposition that the lady lived
in Kent; but Professor Craik is certainly right in
insisting that she was of the North.  Dr. Grosart and
Mr. Fleay, both authorities of importance, agree in
discovering the name Rose Dinle or Dinley; but of a
person so Christian-named no record has yet been found,
though the surname Dyneley or Dinley occurs in the
Whalley registers and elsewhere.  In the Eclogue of the
_Shepheardes Calendar_, to which this note is appended,
Colin Clout--so the poet designates himself--complains
to Hobbinol--that is, Harvey--of the ill success of his
passion.  Harvey, we may suppose, is paying him a visit
in the North; or perhaps the pastoral is merely a
versifying of what passed between them in letters.
However this may be, Colin is bewailing his hapless
fate.  His friend, in reply, advises him to
Forsake the soyle that so doth thee bewitch, &c.
Surely E.K.'s gloss is scarcely necessary to tell us
what these words mean.  'Come down,' they say, 'from
your bleak North country hills where she dwells who
binds you with her spell, and be at peace far away from
her in the genial South land.'  In another Eclogue
(April) the subduing beauty is described as 'the
Widdowes daughter of the Glen,' surely a Northern
address.  On these words the well-informed E.K.
remarks: 'He calleth Rosalind the Widowes daughter of
the glenne, that is, of a country hamlet or borough,
which I thinke is rather sayde to coloure and concele
the person, than simply spoken.  For it is well known,
even in spighte of Colin and Hobbinol, that she is a
gentlewoman of no meane house, nor endowed with anye
vulgare and common gifts, both of nature and manners:
but suche indeede, as neede neither Colin be ashamed to
have her made known by his verses, nor Hobbinol be
greved that so she should be commended to immortalitie
for her rare and singular virtues.'  Whoever this
charming lady was, and whatever glen she made bright
with her presence, it appears that she did not
reciprocate the devoted affection of the studious young
Cambridge graduate who, with probably no apparent
occupation, was loitering for a while in her vicinity.
It was some other--he is called Menalacas in one of his
rival's pastorals--who found favour in her eyes.  The
poet could only wail and beat his breast.  Eclogues I.
and VI. are all sighs and tears.  Perhaps in the course
of time a copy of the _Faerie Queene_ might reach the
region where Menalcas and Rosalind were growing old
together; and she, with a certain ruth perhaps mixed
with her anger, might recognise in Mirabella an image
of her fair young disdainful self{4}.  The poet's
attachment was no transient flame that flashed and was
gone.  When at the instance of his friend he travelled
southward away from the scene of his discomfiture, he
went weeping and inconsolable.  In the Fourth Eclogue
Hobbinol is discovered by Thenot deeply mourning, and,
asked the reason, replies that his grief is because
. . . the ladde whome long I loved so deare
Nowe loves a lasse that all his love doth scorne;
He plongd in payne, his tressed locks dooth teare.
Shepheards delights he dooth them all forsweare;
Hys pleasant pipe, whych made us meriment,
He wylfully hath broke, and doth forbeare
His wonted songs, wherein he all outwent.
.       .       .       .       .
Colin thou kenst, the Southerne shepheardes boye;
Him Love hath wounded with a deadly darte.  &c.
The memory of Rosalind, in spite of her unkindness,
seems to have been fondly cherished by the poet, and
yielded to no rival vision--though there may have been
fleeting fits of passion--till some fourteen years
after he and she had parted--till the year 1592, when,
as we shall see, Spenser, then living in the south of
Ireland, met that Elizabeth who is mentioned in the
sonnet quoted above, and who some year and a half after
that meeting became his wife.  On the strength of an
entry found in the register of St. Clement Danes Church
daughter of Edmond'--it has been conjectured that the
poet was married before 1587.  This conjecture seems
entirely unacceptable.  There is nothing to justify the
theory that the Edmund Spenser of the register was the
poet.  It is simply incredible that Spenser, one who,
as has been said, poured out all his soul in his poems,
should have wooed and won some fair lady to his wife,
without ever a poetical allusion to his courtship and
his triumph.  It is not at all likely, as far as one
can judge from their titles, that any one of his lost
works was devoted to the celebration of any such
successful passion.  Lastly, besides this important
negative evidence, there is distinct positive testimony
that long after 1587 the image of Rosalind had not been
displaced in his fancy by any other loveliness.  In
_Colin Clouts Come Home Again_, written, as will be
seen, in 1591, though not published until 1595, after
the poet has 'full deeply divined of love and beauty,'
one Melissa in admiration avers that all true lovers
are greatly bound to him--most especially women.  The
faithful Hobbinol says that women have but ill requited
their poet:--
'He is repayd with scorne and foule despite,
That yrkes each gentle heart which it doth heare.'
'Indeed,' says Lucid, 'I have often heard
Faire Rosalind of divers fowly blamed
For being to that swaine too cruell hard.
Lucid however would defend her on the ground that love
may not be compelled:--
'Beware therefore, ye groomes, I read betimes
How rashly blame of Rosalind ye raise.'
This caution Colin eagerly and ardently reinforces, and
with additions.  His heart was still all tender towards
her, and he would not have one harsh word thrown at
her:--
Ah! Shepheards, then said Colin, ye ne weet
How great a guilt upon your heads ye draw
To make so bold a doome, with words unmeet,
Of thing celestiall which ye never saw.
For she is not like as the other crew
Of shepheards daughters which emongst you bee,
But of divine regard and heavenly hew,
Excelling all that ever ye did see;
Not then to her that scorned thing so base,
But to myselfe the blame that lookt so hie,
So hie her thoughts as she herselfe have place
And loath each lowly thing with lofty eie;
Yet so much grace let her vouchsafe to grant
To simple swaine, sith her I may not love,
Yet that I may her honour paravant
And praise her worth, though far my wit above.
Such grace shall be some guerdon for the griefe
And long affliction which I have endured;
Such grace sometimes shall give me some reliefe
And ease of paine which cannot be recured.
And ye my fellow shepheards, which do see
And heare the languors of my too long dying,
Unto the world for ever witnesse bee
That hers I die, nought to the world denying
This simple trophe of her great conquest.
This residence of Spenser in the North, which
corresponds with that period of Milton's life spent at
his father's house at Horton in Buckinghamshire, ended,
as there has been occasion to state, in the year 1577.
What was the precise cause of Spenser's coming South,
is not known for certain.  'E.K.' says in one of his
glosses, already quoted in part, that the poet 'for
speciall occasion of private affayres (as I have bene
partly of himselfe informed) and for his more
preferment, removing out of the North parts, came into
the South, as Hobbinoll indeede advised him privately.'
It is clear from his being admitted at his college as a
sizar, that his private means were not good.  Perhaps
during his residence in the North he may have been
dependent on the bounty of his friends.  It was then in
the hope of some advancement of his fortunes that,
bearing with him no doubt in manuscript certain results
of all his life's previous labour, he turned away from
his cold love and her glen, and all her country, and
set his face Town-ward.
It is said that his friend Harvey introduced him
to that famous accomplished gentleman--that mirror of
true knighthood--Sir Philip Sidney, and it would seem
that Penshurst became for some time his home.  There
has already been quoted a line describing Spenser as
'the southern shepheardes boye.'  This southern
shepherd is probably Sidney.  Sidney, it would seem,
introduced him to his father and to his uncle, the Earl
of Leicester.  If we are to take Iren{ae}us' words
literally--and there seems no reason why we should
not--Spenser was for a time at least in Ireland, when
Sidney's father was Lord Deputy.  Iren{ae}us, in _A View
of the Present State of Ireland_, certainly represents
Spenser himself; and he speaks of what he _said_ at the
execution of a notable traitor at Limerick, called
Murrogh O'Brien; see p. 636 of this volume.  However,
he was certainly back in England and in London in 1579,
residing at the Earl of Leicester's house in the
Strand, where Essex Street now stands.  He dates one of
his letters to Harvey, 'Leycester House, this 5
October, 1579.'  Perhaps at this time he commenced, or
renewed, or continued his acquaintance with his
distinguished relatives at Althorpe.  During the time
he spent now at Penshurst and in London, he mixed
probably with the most brilliant intellectual society
of his time.  Sidney was himself endowed with no mean
genius.  He, Lord Leicester, Lord Strange, and others,
with whom Spenser was certainly, or in all probability,
acquainted, were all eminent patrons and protectors of
genius.
This passage of Spenser's life is of high
interest, because in the course of it that splendid era
of our literature commonly called the Elizabethan
Period may be said to have begun.  Spenser is the
foremost chronologically of those great spirits who
towards the close of the sixteenth century lifted up
their immortal voices, and spoke words to be heard for
all time.  In the course of this present passage of his
life, he published his first important work--a work
which secured him at once the hearty recognition of his
contemporaries as a true poet risen up amongst them.
This work was the _Shepheardes Calendar_, to which so
many references have already been made.
It consists of twelve eclogues, one for each month
of the year.  Of these, three (i., vi., and xii.), as
we have seen, treat specially of his own disappointment
in love.  Three (ii., viii., and x.) are of a more
general character, having old age, a poetry combat,
'the perfect pattern of a poet' for their subjects.
One other (iii.) deals with love-matters.  One (iv.)
celebrates the Queen, three (v., vii, and ix.) discuss
'Protestant and Catholic,' Anglican and Puritan
questions.  One (xi.) is an elegy upon 'the death of
some maiden of great blood, whom he calleth Dido.'
These poems were ushered into the world by Spenser's
college friend Edward Kirke, for such no doubt is the
true interpretation of the initials E.K.  This
gentleman performed his duty in a somewhat copious
manner.  He addressed 'to the most excellent and
learned both orator and poet Mayster Gabriell Harvey' a
letter warmly commending 'the new poet' to his
patronage, and defending the antique verbiage of the
eclogues; he prefixed to the whole work a general
argument, a particular one to each part; he appended to
every poem a 'glosse' explaining words and allusions.
The work is dedicated to Sir Philip Sidney.  It was
published in the winter of 1579-80.
More than once in the course of it, Spenser refers
to Tityrus as his great master.  The twelfth eclogue
opens thus:
The gentle shepheard sat beside a springe
All in the shadow of a bushye brere,
That Colin height, which well could pype and singe,
For hee of Tityrus his songs did lere.
Tityrus, on E.K.'s authority, was Chaucer.  It is
evident from the language--both the words and verbal
forms--used in this poem that Spenser had zealously
studied Chaucer, whose greatest work had appeared just
about two centuries before Spenser's first important
publication.  The work, however, in which he imitates
Chaucer's manner is not the _Shepheardes Calendar_, but
his _Prosopopoia or Mother Hubberds Tale_, which he
says, writing in a later year, he had 'long sithens
composed in the raw conceipt of my youth.'  The form
and manner of the _Shepheardes Calendar_ reflected not
Chaucer's influence upon the writer, but the influence
of a vast event which had changed the face of
literature since the out-coming of the _Canterbury
Tales_--of the revival of learning.  That event had put
fresh models before men, had greatly modified old
literary forms, had originated new.  The classical
influence impressed upon Europe was by no means an
unmixed good; in some respects it retarded the natural
development of the modern mind by overpowering it with
its prestige and stupefying it with a sense of
inferiority; while it raised the ideal of perfection,
it tended to give rise to mere imitations and
affectations.  Amongst these new forms was the
Pastoral.  When Virgil, Theocritus, 'Daphnis and
Chloe,' and other writers and works of the ancient
pastoral literature once more gained the ascendancy,
then a modern pastoral poetry began to be.  This poetry
flourished greatly in Italy in the sixteenth century.
It had been cultivated by Sannazaro, Guarini, Tasso.
Arcadia had been adopted by the poets for their
country.  In England numerous _Eclogues_ made their
appearance.  Amongst the earliest and the best of these
were Spenser's.  It would perhaps be unjust to treat
this modern pastoral literature as altogether an
affectation.  However unreal, the pastoral world had
its charms--a pleasant feeling imparted of
emancipation, a deep quietude, a sweet tranquillity.
If vulgar men discovered their new worlds, and
trafficked and bustled there, why should not the poet
discover his Arcadia, and repose at his ease in it,
secure from the noises of feet coming and going over
the roads of the earth?
That fine melodiousness, which is one of Spenser's
signal characteristics, may be perceived in his
_Eclogues_, as also a native gracefulness of style,
which is another distinguishing mark of him.
Perceivable, too, are his great, perilous fluency of
language and his immense fecundity of mind.  The work
at once secured him a front place in the poetical ranks
of the day.  Sidney mentions it in his _Apologie for
Poetrie_;{5} Abraham Fraunce draws illustrations from
it in his _Lawyers Logicke_, which appeared in 1588;
Meres praises it; 'Maister Edmund Spenser,' says
Drayton, 'has done enough for the immortality, had he
only given us his _Shepheardes Calendar_, a
masterpiece, if any.'  It is easy to discern in
_Lycidas_ signs of Milton's study of it.
During Spenser's sojourn in the society of the
Sidneys and the Dudleys, letters passed between him and
Harvey, some of which are extant.  From these, and from
the editorial notes of Kirke, we hear of other works
written by Spenser, ready to be given to the light.
The works thus heard of are _Dreames_, _Legends_,
_Court of Cupide_, _The English Poet_, _The Dying
Pelican_, _Stemmata Dudleiana_, _Slomber_, _Nine
English Comedies_, _The Epithalamion Thamesis_, and
also _The Faerie Queene_ commenced.  Of these works
perhaps the _Legends_, _Court of Cupide_, and
_Epithalamion Thamesis_ were subsequently with
modifications incorporated in the _Faerie Queene_; the
_Stemmata Dudleiana_, _Nine English Comedies_, _Dying
Pelican_, are altogether lost.  The _Faerie Queene_ had
been begun.  So far as written, it had been submitted
to the criticism of Harvey.  On April 10, 1580, Spenser
writes to Harvey, wishing him to return it with his
'long expected judgment' upon it.  Harvey had already
pronounced sentence in a letter dated April 7, and this
is the sentence: 'In good faith I had once again nigh
forgotten your _Faerie Queene_; howbeit, by good
chaunce I have nowe sent hir home at the laste, neither
in a better nor worse case than I founde hir.  And must
you of necessitie have my judgement of hir indeede?  To
be plaine, I am voyde of al judgement, if your nine
Com{oe}dies, whereunto, in imitation of Herodotus, you
give the names of the Nine Muses, and (in one man's
fansie not unworthily), come not neerer Ariostoes
Com{oe}dies, eyther for the finenesse of plausible
elocution, or the rareness of poetical invention, than
that Elvish queene doth to his Orlando Furioso, which
notwithstanding, you will needes seem to emulate, and
hope to overgo, as you flatly professed yourself in one
of your last letters.  Besides that, you know it hath
bene the usual practise of the most exquisite and odde
wittes in all nations, and especially in Italie, rather
to shewe and advaunce themselves that way than any
other; as namely, those three notorious dyscoursing
heads Bibiena, Machiavel, and Aretine did (to let Bembo
and Ariosto passe), with the great admiration and
wonderment of the whole countrey; being indeede reputed
matchable in all points, both for conceyt of witte, and
eloquent decyphering of matters, either with
Aristophanes and Menander in Greek, or with Plautus and
Terence in Latin, or with any other in any other tong.
But I will not stand greatly with you in your owne
matters.  If so be the Faery Queen be fairer in your
eie than the Nine Muses, and Hobgoblin runne away with
the garland from Apollo; marke what I saye, and yet I
will not say that I thought; but there is an end for
this once, and fare you well, till God or some good
Aungell putte you in a better minde.'
Clearly the _Faerie Queene_ was but little to
Harvey's taste.  It was too alien from the cherished
exemplars of his heart.  Happily Spenser was true to
himself, and went on with his darling work in spite of
the strictures of pedantry.  This is not the only
instance in which the dubious character of Harvey's
influence is noticeable.  The letters, from one of
which the above doom is quoted, enlighten us also as to
a grand scheme entertained at this time for forcing the
English tongue to conform to the metrical rules of the
classical languages.  Already in a certain circle rime
was discredited as being, to use Milton's words nearly
a century afterwards, 'no necessary adjunct or true
ornament of poem or good verse, in longer works
especially, but the invention of a barbarous age to set
off wretched matter and lame metre.'  A similar attempt
was made in the course of the sixteenth century in
other parts of Europe, and with the same final issue.
Gabriel Harvey was an active leader in this deluded
movement.  When Sidney too, and Dyer, another poet of
the time, proclaimed a 'general surceasing and silence
of bald rhymes, and also of the very best too, instead
whereof they have by authority of their whole senate,
prescribed certain laws and rules of quantity of
English syllables for English verse, having had already
thereof great practice,' Spenser was drawn 'to their
faction.'
'I am of late,' he writes to Harvey, 'more in love
wyth my Englishe versifying than with ryming; whyche I
should have done long since if I would then have
followed your councell.'  In allying himself with these
Latin prosody bigots Spenser sinned grievously against
his better taste.  'I like your late Englishe
hexameters so exceedingly well,' he writes to Harvey,
'that I also enure my pen sometime in that kinde,
whyche I find in deed, as I have heard you often
that it will easily and fairly yield itself to our
mother tongue.  For the onely or chiefest hardnesse
whyche seemeth is in the accente; whyche sometimes
gapeth and as it were yawneth il-favouredly, comming
shorte of that it should, and sometimes exceeding the
measure of the number; as in carpenter the middle
sillable being used short in speache, when it shall be
read long in verse, seemeth like a lame gosling that
draweth one legge after hir.  And heaven being used
shorte as one syllable, when it is in verse stretched
with a Diastole is like a lame dogge, that holdes up
one legge.'{6}  His ear was far too fine and sensitive
to endure the fearful sounds uttered by the poets of
this Procrust{ae}an creed.  The language seemed to groan
and shriek at the agonies and contortions to which it
was subjected; and Spenser could not but hear its
outcries.  But he made himself as deaf as might be.
'It is to be wonne with custom,' he proceeds, in the
letter just quoted from, 'and rough words must be
studied with use.  For why, a God's name, may not we,
as the Greekes, have the kingdom of oure owne language,
and measure our accentes by the sounde, reserving the
quantitie to the verse? . . . I would hartily wish you
would either send me the rules or precepts of arte
which you observe in quantities; or else follow mine
that Mr. Philip Sidney gave me, being the very same
which Mr. Drant devised, but enlarged with Mr. Sidney's
own judgement, and augmented with my observations, that
we might both accorde and agree in one, leaste we
overthrowe one another and be overthrown of the rest.'
He himself produced the following lines in accordance,
as he fondly hoped, with the instructions of the new
school:--
Unhappie verse! the witnesse of my unhappie state,
Make thy selfe fluttring winge of thy fast flying
thought,
And fly forth unto my love whersoever she be.
Whether lying reastlesse in heavy bedde, or else
Sitting so cheerelesse at the cheerefull boorde, or
else
Playing alone carelesse on hir heavenlie virginals.
If in bed, tell hir that my eyes can take no reste;
If at boorde, tell hir that my mouth can eat no
meete;
If at hir virginals, tell her I can beare no mirth.
Asked why?  Waking love suffereth no sleepe;
Say that raging love doth appall the weake stomacke,
Say that lamenting love marreth the musicall.
Tell hir that hir pleasures were wonte to lull me
asleepe,
Tell her that hir beauty was wonte to feede mine
eyes,
Tell hir that hir sweete tongue was wonte to make me
mirth.
Now doe I nightly waste, wanting my kindlie rest,
Now doe I dayly starve, wanting my daily food,
Now doe I always dye wanting my timely mirth.
And if I waste who will bewaile my heavy chance?
And if I starve, who will record my cursed end?
And if I dye, who will saye, This was Immerito?
Spenser of the sensitive ear wrote these lines.  When
the pedantic phantasy which had for a while seduced and
corrupted him had gone from him, with what remorse he
must have remembered these strange monsters of his
creation!  Let us conclude our glance at this sad fall
from harmony by quoting the excellent words of one who
was a bitter opponent of Harvey in this as in other
matters.  'The hexameter verse,' says Nash in his
_Fowre Letters Confuted_, 1592, 'I graunt to be a
gentleman of an auncient house (so is many an English
beggar), yet this clyme of ours hee cannot thrive in;
our speech is too craggy for him to set his plough in;
hee goes twitching and hopping in our language like a
man running upon quagmiers up the hill in one syllable
and down the dale in another; retaining no part of that
stately smooth gate, which he vaunts himselfe with
amongst the Greeks and Latins.'
Some three years were spent by Spenser in the
enjoyment of Sidney's friendship and the patronage of
Sidney's father and uncle.  During this time he would
seem to have been constantly hoping for some
preferment.  According to a tradition, first recorded
by Fuller, the obstructor of the success of his suit
was the Treasurer, Lord Burghley.  It is clear that he
had enemies at Court--at least at a later time.  In
Again_, he entreats Raleigh, to 'with your good
countenance protest against the malice of evil mouthes,
which are always wide open to carpe at and misconstrue
my simple meaning.'  A passage in the _Ruines of Time_
(see the lines beginning 'O grief of griefs!  O full of
all good hearts!') points to the same conclusion; and
so the concluding lines of the Sixth Book of the
_Faerie Queene_, when, having told how the Blatant
Beast (not killed as Lord Macaulay says in his essay on
Bunyan, but 'supprest and tamed' for a while by Sir
Calidore) at last broke his iron chain and ranged again
through the world, and raged sore in each degree and
state, he adds:--
Ne may this homely verse, of many meanest,
Hope to escape his venemous despite,
More then my former writs, all were they clearest
From blamefull blot, and from all that wite,
With which some wicked tongues did it backebite,
And bring into a mighty Peres displeasure,
That never so deserved to endite.
Therfore do you my rimes keep better measure,
And seek to please, that now is counted wisemens
threasure.
In the _Tears of the Muses_ Calliope says of certain
persons of eminent rank:--
Their great revenues all in sumptuous pride
They spend that nought to learning they may spare;
And the rich fee which Poets wont divide
Now Parasites and Sycophants do share.
Several causes have been suggested to account for this
disfavour.  The popular tradition was pleased to
explain it by making Burghley the ideal dullard who has
no soul for poetry--to whom one copy of verses is very
much as good as another, and no copy good for anything.
It delighted to bring this commonplace gross-minded
person into opposition with one of the most spiritual
of geniuses.  In this myth Spenser represents mind,
Burghley matter.  But there is no justification in
facts for this tradition.  It may be that the Lord
Treasurer was not endowed with a high intellectual
nature; but he was far too wise in his generation not
to pretend a virtue if he had it not, when
circumstances called for anything of the sort.  When
the Queen patronized literature, we may be sure Lord
Burghley was too discreet to disparage and oppress it.
Another solution refers to Burghley's Puritanism as the
cause of the misunderstanding; but, as Spenser too
inclined that way, this is inadequate.  Probably, as
Todd and others have thought, what alienated his
Lordship at first was Spenser's connection with
Leicester; what subsequently aggravated the
estrangement was his friendship with Essex.
Footnotes
---------
{1} See Peter Cunningham's _Introduction to Extracts
from Accounts of the Revels at Court_.  (Shakspeare
Society.)
{2} It may be suggested that what are called the
archaisms of Spenser's style may be _in part_ due
to the author's long residence in the country with
one of the older forms of the language spoken all
round him and spoken by him, in fact his
vernacular.  I say _in part_, because of course his
much study of Chaucer must be taken into account.
But, as Mr. Richard Morris has remarked to me, he
could not have drawn from Chaucer those forms and
words of a _northern_ dialect which appear in the
_Calendar_.
{3} These are given in the Appendix to the present
work.
{4} This supposed description of his first love was
written probably during the courtship, which ended,
as we shall see, in his marriage.  The First Love
is said to be portrayed in cant. vii., the Last in
cant. x. of book vi. of the _Faerie Queene_.  But
this identification of Rosalind and Mirabilla is,
after all, but a conjecture, and is not be accepted
as gospel.
{5} See this work amongst Mr. Arber's excellent
_English Reprints_.
{6} _Ancient Critical Essays_, ed. Hazlewood, 1815, pp.
In the year 1580 Spenser was removed from the society
and circumstances in which, except for his probable
visit to Ireland, he had lived and moved as we have
seen, for some three years.  From that year to near the
close of his life his home was to be in Ireland.  He
paid at least two visits to London and its environs in
the course of these eighteen years; but it seems clear
that his home was in Ireland.  Perhaps his biographers
have hitherto not truly appreciated this residence in
Ireland.  We shall see that a liberal grant of land was
presently bestowed upon him in the county of Cork; and
they have reckoned him a successful man, and wondered
at the querulousness that occasionally makes itself
heard in his works.  Towards the very end of this life,
Spenser speaks of himself as one
Whom sullein care
Through discontent of my long fruitlesse stay
In princes court and expectation vayne
Of idle hopes, which still doe fly away
Like empty shaddowes, did afflict my brayne.
Those who marvel at such language perhaps forget what a
dreary exile the poet's life in Ireland must in fact
have been.  It is true that it was relieved by several
journeys to England, by his receiving at least one
visit from an English friend, by his finding, during at
any rate the earlier part of his absence, some
congenial English friends residing in the country, by
his meeting at length with that Elizabeth whose
excelling beauty he has sung so sweetly, and whom he
married; it is also true that there was in him--as in
Milton and in Wordsworth--a certain great self-
containedness,{1} that he carried his world with him
wherever he went, that he had great allies and high
company in the very air that flowed around him,
whatever land he inhabited; all this is true, but yet
to be cut off from the fellowship which, however self-
sufficing, he so dearly loved--to look no longer on the
face of Sidney his hero, his ideal embodied, his living
Arthur, to hear but as it were an echo of the splendid
triumphs won by his and our England in those glorious
days, to know of his own high fame but by report, to be
parted from the friendship of Shakspere--surely this
was exile.  To live in the Elizabethan age, and to be
severed from those brilliant spirits to which the fame
of that age is due!  Further, the grievously unsettled,
insurgent state of Ireland at this time--as at many a
time before and since--must be borne in mind.  Living
there was living on the side of a volcanic mountain.
That the perils of so living were not merely imaginary,
we shall presently see.  He did not shed tears and
strike his bosom, like the miserable Ovid at Tomi; he
'wore rather in his bonds a cheerful brow, lived, and
took comfort,' finding his pleasure in that high
spiritual communion we have spoken of, playing
pleasantly, like some happy father, with the children
of his brain, joying in their caprices, their
noblenesses, their sweet adolescence; but still it was
exile, and this fact may explain that tone of
discontent which here and there is perceptible in his
writings.{2}
When in 1580 Arthur, Lord Grey of Wilton, was
appointed Lord Deputy of Ireland, he--perhaps through
Lord Leicester's influence, perhaps on account of
Spenser's already knowing something of the country--
made Spenser his Private Secretary.  There can be no
doubt that Spenser proceeded with him to Dublin.  It
was in Ireland, probably about this time, that he made
or renewed his acquaintance with Sir Walter Raleigh.
In 1581 he was appointed Clerk of Degrees and
Recognizances in the Irish Court of Chancery, a post
which he held for seven years, at the end of which time
he received the appointment of Clerk to the Council of
Munster.  In the same year in which he was assigned the
former clerkship, he received also a lease of the lands
and Abbey of Enniscorthy in Wexford county.  It is to
be hoped that his Chancery Court duties permitted him
to reside for a while on that estate.  'Enniscorthy,'
says the _Guide to Ireland_ published by Mr. Murray,
'is one of the prettiest little towns in the Kingdom,
the largest portion of it being on a steep hill on the
right bank of the Slaney, which here becomes a deep and
navigable stream, and is crossed by a bridge of six
arches.'  There still stands there 'a single tower of
the old Franciscan monastery.'  But Spenser soon parted
with this charming spot, perhaps because of its
inconvenient distance from the scene of his official
work.  In December of the year in which the lease was
given, he transferred it to one Richard Synot.  In the
following year Lord Grey was recalled.  'The Lord
Deputy,' says Holinshed, 'after long suit for his
revocation, received Her Majesty's letters for the
same.'  His rule had been marked by some extreme,
perhaps necessary, severities, and was probably
somewhat curtly concluded on account of loud complaints
made against him on this score.  Spenser would seem to
have admired and applauded him, both as a ruler and as
a patron and friend.  He mentions him with much respect
in his _View of the Present State of Ireland_.  One of
the sonnets prefixed to the _Faerie Queene_ is
addressed 'to the most renowmed and valiant lord the
lord Grey of Wilton,' and speaks of him with profound
gratitude:--
Most noble lord the pillor of my life,
And patrone of my Muses pupillage,
Through whose large bountie poured on me rife,
In the first season of my feeble age,
I now doe live, bound yours by vassalage:
Sith nothing ever may redeeme, nor reave
Out of your endlesse debt so sure a gage,
Vouchsafe in worth this small guift to receave,
Which in your noble hands for pledge I leave,
Of all the rest, that I am tyde t' account.
Lord Grey died in 1593.  Spenser may have renewed his
friendship with him in 1589, when, as we shall see, he
visited England.  For the present their connection was
broken.  It may be considered as fairly certain that
when his lordship returned to England in 1582, Spenser
did not return with him, but abode still in Ireland.
There is, indeed, a 'Maister Spenser' mentioned in
a letter written by James VI. of Scotland from St.
Andrews in 1583 to Queen Elizabeth: 'I have staied
Maister Spenser upon the letter quhilk is written with
my auin hand quhilk sall be readie within tua daies.'
It may be presumed that this gentleman is the same with
him of whose postal services mention is found, as we
have seen, in 1569.  At any rate there is nothing
whatever to justify his identification with the poet.
On the other hand, there are several circumstances
which seem to indicate that Spenser was in Ireland
continuously from the year of his going there with Lord
Grey to the year of his visiting England with Raleigh
in 1589, when he presented to her Majesty and published
the first three books of the _Faerie Queene_.  Whatever
certain glimpses we can catch of Spenser during these
ten years, he is in Ireland.
We have seen that he was holding one clerkship or
another in Ireland during all this time.  In the next
place, we find him mentioned as forming one of a
company described as gathered together at a cottage
near Dublin in a work by his friend Lodovick{3}
Bryskett, written, as may be inferred with considerable
certainty, some time in or about the year 1582, though
not published till 1606.  This work, entitled _A
Discourse of Civill Life; containing the Ethike part of
Morall Philosophie_, 'written to the right honorable
Arthur, late Lord Grey of Wilton'--written before his
recall in 1582--describes in the introduction a party
met together at the author's cottage near Dublin,
consisting of 'Dr. Long, Primate of Ardmagh; Sir Robert
Dillon, knight; M. Dormer, the Queene's sollicitor;
Capt. Christopher Carleil; Capt. Thomas Norreis; Capt.
Warham St. Leger; Capt. Nicholas Dawtrey; and M. Edmond
Spenser, late your lordship's secretary; and Th. Smith,
apothecary.'  In the course of conversation Bryskett
envies 'the happinesse of the Italians who have in
their mother-tongue late writers that have with a
singular easie method taught all that which Plato or
Aristotle have confusedly or obscurely left written.'
The 'late writers' who have performed this highly
remarkable service of clarifying and making
intelligible Plato and Aristotle--perhaps the
'confusion' and 'obscurity' Bryskett speaks of mean
merely the difficulties of a foreign language for one
imperfectly acquainted with it--are Alexander
Piccolomini, Gio. Baptista Giraldi, and Guazzo, 'all
three having written upon the Ethick part of Morall
Bryskett then earnestly wishes--and here perhaps, in
spite of those queer words about Plato and Aristotle,
we may sympathise with him--that some of our countrymen
would promote by English treatises the study of Moral
Philosophy in English.
'In the meane while I must struggle with those
bookes which I vnderstand and content myselfe to
plod upon them, in hope that God (who knoweth the
sincerenesse of my desire) will be pleased to open
my vnderstanding, so as I may reape that profit of
my reading, which I trauell for.  Yet is there a
gentleman in this company, whom I have had often a
purpose to intreate, that as his leisure might serue
him, he would vouchsafe to spend some time with me
to instruct me in some hard points which I cannot of
myselfe understand; knowing him to be not onely
perfect in the Greek tongue, but also very well read
in Philosophie, both morall and naturall.
Neuertheless such is my bashfulnes, as I neuer yet
durst open my mouth to disclose this my desire unto
him, though I have not wanted some hartning
thereunto from himselfe.  For of loue and kindnes to
me, he encouraged me long sithens to follow the
reading of the Greeke tongue, and offered me his
helpe to make me vnderstand it.  But now that so
good an oportunitie is offered vnto me, to satisfie
in some sort my desire; I thinke I should commit a
great fault, not to myselfe alone, but to all this
company, if I should not enter my request thus
farre, as to moue him to spend this time which we
have now destined to familiar discourse and
conuersation, in declaring unto us the great
benefits which men obtaine by knowledge of Morall
Philosophie, and in making us to know what the same
is, what be the parts thereof, whereby vertues are
to be distinguished from vices; and finally that he
will be pleased to run ouer in such order as he
shall thinke good, such and so many principles and
rules thereof, as shall serue not only for my better
instruction, but also for the contentment and
satisfaction of you al.  For I nothing doubt, but
that euery one of you will be glad to heare so
profitable a discourse and thinke the time very wel
spent wherin so excellent a knowledge shal be
reuealed unto you, from which euery one may be
assured to gather some fruit as wel as myselfe.
Therefore (said I) turning myselfe to _M. Spenser_,
It is you, sir, to whom it pertaineth to shew
yourselfe courteous now unto us all and to make vs
all beholding unto you for the pleasure and profit
which we shall gather from your speeches, if you
shall vouchsafe to open unto vs the goodly cabinet,
in which this excellent treasure of vertues lieth
locked up from the vulgar sort.  And thereof in the
behalfe of all as for myselfe, I do most earnestly
intreate you not to say vs nay.  Vnto which wordes
of mine euery man applauding most with like words of
request and the rest with gesture and countenances
expressing as much, _M. Spenser_ answered in this
maner: Though it may seeme hard for me, to refuse
the request made by you all, whom euery one alone, I
should for many respects be willing to gratifie; yet
as the case standeth, I doubt not but with the
consent of the most part of you, I shall be excused
at this time of this taske which would be laid vpon
me, for sure I am, that it is not vnknowne unto you,
that I haue already vndertaken a work tending to the
same effect, which is in _heroical verse_ under the
title of a _Faerie Queene_ to represent all the
moral vertues, assigning to every vertue a Knight to
be the patron and defender of the same, in whose
actions and feates of arms and chiualry the
operations of that vertue, whereof he is the
protector, are to be expressed, and the vices and
unruly appetites that oppose themselves against the
same, to be beaten down and overcome.  Which work,
as I haue already well entred into, if God shall
please to spare me life that I may finish it
according to my mind, your wish (_M. Bryskett_) will
be in some sort accomplished, though perhaps not so
effectually as you could desire.  And the may very
well serue for my excuse, if at this time I craue to
be forborne in this your request, since any
discourse, that I might make thus on the sudden in
such a subject would be but simple, and little to
your satisfactions.  For it would require good
aduisement and premeditation for any man to
vndertake the declaration of these points that you
have proposed, containing in effect the Ethicke part
of Morall Philosophie.  Whereof since I haue taken
in hand to discourse at large in my poeme before
spoken, I hope the expectation of that work may
serue to free me at this time from speaking in that
matter, notwithstanding your motion and all your
intreaties.  But I will tell you how I thinke by
himselfe he may very well excuse my speech, and yet
satisfie all you in this matter.  I haue seene (as
he knoweth) a translation made by himselfe out of
the Italian tongue of a dialogue comprehending all
the Ethick part of Moral Philosophy, written by one
of those three he formerly mentioned, and that is by
_Giraldi_ under the title of a dialogue of ciuil
life.  If it please him to bring us forth that
translation to be here read among vs, or otherwise
to deliuer to us, as his memory may serue him, the
contents of the same; he shal (I warrant you)
satisfie you all at the ful, and himselfe wil haue
no cause but to thinke the time well spent in
reuiewing his labors, especially in the company of
so many his friends, who may thereby reape much
profit and the translation happily fare the better
by some mending it may receiue in the perusing, as
all writings else may do by the often examination of
the same.  Neither let it trouble him that I so
turne ouer to him againe the taske he wold have put
me to; for it falleth out fit for him to verifie the
principall of all this Apologie, euen now made for
himselfe; because thereby it will appeare that he
hath not withdrawne himselfe from seruice of the
state to live idle or wholly priuate to himselfe,
but hath spent some time in doing that which may
greatly benefit others and hath serued not a little
to the bettering of his owne mind, and increasing of
his knowledge, though he for modesty pretend much
ignorance, and pleade want in wealth, much like some
rich beggars, who either of custom, or for
couetousnes, go to begge of others those things
whereof they haue no want at home.  With this answer
of _M. Spensers_ it seemed that all the company were
wel satisfied, for after some few speeches whereby
they had shewed an extreme longing after his worke
of the _Faerie Queene_, whereof some parcels had
been by some of them seene, they all began to presse
me to produce my translation mentioned by _M.
Spenser_ that it might be perused among them; or
else that I should (as near as I could) deliuer unto
them the contents of the same, supposing that my
memory would not much faile me in a thing so studied
and advisedly set downe in writing as a translation
must be.'
Bryskett at length assents to Spenser's proposal, and
proceeds to read his translation of Giraldi, which is
in some sort criticised as he reads, Spenser proposing
one or two questions 'arising principally,' as Todd
says, 'from the discussion of the doctrines of Plato
and Aristotle.'  This invaluable picture of a scene in
Spenser's Irish life shows manifestly in what high
estimation his learning and genius were already held,
and how, in spite of Harvey's sinister criticisms, he
had resumed his great work.  It tells us too that he
found in Ireland a warmly appreciative friend, if
indeed he had not known Bryskett before their going to
Ireland.  Bryskett too, perhaps, was acquainted with
Sir Philip Sidney; for two of the elegies written on
that famous knight's death and printed along with
_Astrophel_ in the elegiac collection made by Spenser
were probably of Bryskett's composition, viz., _The
Mourning Muse of Thestylis_, where 'Liffey's tumbling
stream' is mentioned, and the one entitled _A Pastoral
Eclogue_, where Lycon offers to 'second' Colin's lament
for Phillisides.
What is said of the _Faerie Queene_ in the above
quotation may be illustrated from the sonnet already
quoted from, addressed to Lord Grey--one of the sonnets
that in our modern editions are prefixed to the great
poem.  It speaks of the great poem as
Rude rymes, the which a rustick Muse did weave
In savadge soyle, far from Parnasso mount.
See also the sonnet addressed to the Right Honourable
the Earl of Ormond and Ossory.
A sonnet addressed to Harvey, is dated 'Dublin
this xviij of July, 1586.'  Again, in the course of the
decad now under consideration, Spenser received a grant
of land in Cork--of 3,028 acres, out of the forefeited
estates of the Earl of Desmond.
All these circumstances put together make it
probable, and more than probable, that Spenser remained
in Ireland after Lord Grey's recall.  How thorough his
familiarity with the country grew to be, appears from
the work concerning it which he at last produced.
The years 1586-7-8 were eventful both for England
and for Spenser.  In the first Sidney expired of wounds
received at Zutphen; in the second, Mary Queen of Scots
was executed; in the third, God blew and scattered the
Armada, and also Leicester died.  Spenser weeps over
Sidney--there was never, perhaps, more weeping,
poetical and other, over any death than over that of
Sidney--in his _Astrophel_, the poem above mentioned.
This poem is scarcely worthy of the sad occasion--the
flower of knighthood cut down ere its prime, not yet
In flushing
When blighting was nearest.
Certainly it in no way expresses what Spenser
undoubtedly felt when the woeful news came across the
Channel to him in his Irish home.  Probably his grief
was 'too deep for tears.'  It was probably one of those
'huge cares' which, in Seneca's phrase, not
'loquuntur,' but 'stupent.'  He would fain have been
dumb and opened not his mouth; but the fashion of the
time called upon him to speak.  He was expected to
bring his immortelle, so to say, and lay it on his
hero's tomb, though his limbs would scarcely support
him, and his hand, quivering with the agony of his
heart, could with difficulty either weave it or carry
it.  All the six years they had been parted, the image
of that chivalrous form had never been forgotten.  It
had served for the one model of all that was highest
and noblest in his eyes.  It had represented for him
all true knighthood.  Nor all the years that he lived
after Sidney's death was it forgotten.  It is often
before him, as he writes his later poetry, and is
greeted always with undying love and sorrow.  Thus in
the _Ruines of Time_, he breaks out in a sweet fervour
of unextinguished affection:
Most gentle spirite breathed from above,
Out of the bosom of the Makers blis,
In whom all bountie and all vertuous love
Appeared in their native propertis
And did enrich that noble breast of his
With treasure passing all this worldes worth.
Worthie of heaven itselfe, which brought it forth.
His blessed spirite, full of power divine
And influence of all celestiall grace,
Loathing this sinfull earth and earthlie slime,
Fled backe too soone unto his native place;
Too soone for all that did his love embrace,
Too soone for all this wretched world, whom he
Robd of all right and true nobilitie.
Yet ere this happie soule to heaven went
Out of this fleshie gaole, he did devise
Unto his heavenlie Maker to present
His bodie as a spotles sacrifise,
And chose, that guiltie hands of enemies
Should powre forth th' offring of his guiltles blood,
So life exchanging for his countries good.
O noble spirite, live there ever blessed,
The world's late wonder, and the heaven's new ioy.
Live ever there, and leave me here distressed
With mortall cares and cumbrous worlds anoy;
But where thou dost that happiness enioy,
Bid me, O bid me quicklie come to thee,
That happie there I maie thee alwaies see.
Yet whilest the Fates affoord me vitell breath,
I will it spend in speaking of thy praise,
And sing to thee untill that timelie death
By Heaven's doome doe ende my earthlie daies:
Thereto doo thou my humble spirite raise,
And into me that sacred breath inspire
Which thou there breathest perfect and entire.
It is not quite certain in what part of Ireland
the poet was living when the news that Sidney was not
reached him.  Was he still residing at Dublin, or had
he transferred his home to that southern region which
is so intimately associated with his name?  The sonnet
to Harvey mentioned above shows that he was at Dublin
in July of the year of his friend's death.  It has been
said already that he did not resign his Chancery
clerkship until 1588.  We know that he was settled in
Cork county, at Kilcolman castle, in 1589, because
Raleigh visited him there that year.  He may then have
left Dublin in 1588 or 1589.  According to Dr. Birch's
Life of Spenser, prefixed to the edition of the _Faerie
Queene_ in 1751,{4} and the _Biographia Britannica_,
the grant of land made him in Cork is dated June 27,
the 'Articles' for the 'Undertakers,' which received
the royal assent on June 27, 1586, Spenser is set down
for 3,028 acres; and that he was at Kilcolman before
the Court of Chancery in 1588, and was then appointed,
as we have seen, clerk of the Council of Munster, he
probably went to live somewhere in the province of
Munster that same year.  He may have lived at Kilcolman
before it and the surrounding grounds were secured to
him; he may have entered upon possession on the
strength of a promise of them, before the formal grant
was issued.  He has mentioned the scenery which
environed his castle twice in his great poem; but it is
worth noticing that both mentions occur, not in the
books published, as we shall now very soon see, in
In the famous passage already referred to in the
eleventh canto of the fourth book, describing the
nuptials of the Thames and the Medway, he recounts in
stanzas xl.-xliv. the Irish rivers who were present at
that great river-gathering, and amongst them
Swift Awniduff which of the English man
Is cal'de Blacke water, and the Liffar deep,
Sad Trowis, that once his people ouerran,
Strong _Allo_ tombling from Slewlogher steep,
And _Mulla_ mine, whose waues I whilom taught to weep.
The other mention occurs in the former of the two
cantos _Of Mutability_.  There the poet sings that the
place appointed for the trial of the titles and best
rights of both 'heavenly powers' and 'earthly wights'
was
. . . vpon the highest hights
Of _Arlo-hill_ (Who knowes not _Arlo-hill?_)
That is the highest head (in all mens sights)
Of my old father _Mole_, whom Shepheards quill
Renowmed hath with hymnes fit for a rurall skill.
His poem called _Colin Clouts Come Home Again_,
written in 1591, and dedicated to Sir W. Raleigh 'from
my house at Kilcolman the 27 of December, 1591'{5}--
written therefore after a lengthy absence in England--
exhibits a full familiarity with the country round
about Kilcolman.  On the whole then we may suppose that
his residence at Kilcolman began not later than 1588.
It was to be roughly and and terribly ended ten years
after.
We may suppose he was living there in peace and
quiet, not perhaps undisturbed by growing murmurs of
discontent, by signs of unrepressed and irrepressible
hostility towards his nation, by ill-concealed
sympathies with the Spanish invaders amongst the native
population, when the Armada came and went.   The old
castle in which he had lived had been one of the
residences of the Earls of Desmond.  It stood some two
miles from Doneraile, on the north side of a lake which
was fed by the river Awbeg or Mulla, as the poet
christened it.
'Two miles north-west of Doneraile,' writes
Charles Smith in his _Natural and Civil History of the
County and City of Cork_, 1774, (i. 340, 341)--'is
Kilcoleman, a ruined castle of the Earls of Desmond,
but more celebrated for being the residence of the
immortal Spenser, when he composed his divine poem _The
Faerie Queene_.  The castle is now almost level with
the ground, and was situated on the north side of a
fine lake, in the midst of a vast plain, terminated to
the east by the county of Waterford mountains; Bally-
howra hills to the north, or, as Spenser terms them,
the mountains of Mole, Nagle mountains to the south,
and the mountains of Kerry to the west.  It commanded a
view of above half the breadth of Ireland; and must
have been, when the adjacent uplands were wooded, a
most pleasant and romantic situation; from whence, no
doubt, Spenser drew several parts of the scenery of his
poem.'
Here, then, as in some cool sequestered vale of
life, for some ten years, his visits to England
excepted, lived Spenser still singing sweetly, still,
as he might say, piping, with the woods answering him
and his echo ringing.  Sitting in the shade he would
play many a 'pleasant fit;' he would sing
Some hymne or morall laie,
Or carol made to praise his loved lasse;
he would see in the rivers that flowed around his tower
beings who lived and loved, and would sing of their
mutual passions.  It must have sounded strangely to
hear the notes of his sweet voice welling forth from
his old ruin--to hear music so subtle and refined
issuing from that scarred and broken relic of past
turbulencies --
The shepheard swaines that did about him play
.   .   .   with greedie listfull eares
Did stand astonisht at his curious skill
Like hartlesse deare, dismayed with thunders sound.
He presents a picture such as would have delighted his
own fancy, though perhaps the actual experience may not
have been unalloyed with pain.  It is a picture which
in many ways resembles that presented by one of kindred
type of genius, who has already been mentioned as of
affinity with him--by Wordsworth.  Wordsworth too sang
in a certain sense from the shade, far away from the
vanity of courts, and the uproar of cities; sang 'from
a still place, remote from men;' sang, like his own
Highland girl, all alone with the 'vale profound'
'overflowing with the sound;' finding, too, objects of
friendship and love in the forms of nature which
surrounded his tranquil home.
Of these two poets in their various lonelinesses
one may perhaps quote those exquisite lines written by
one of them of a somewhat differently caused isolation:
each one of them too lacked
Not friends for simple glee
Nor yet for higher sympathy.
To his side the fallow-deer
Came and rested without fear;
The eagle, lord of land and sea,
Stooped down to pay him fealty.
.      .      .      .      .
_He knew the rocks which angels haunt
Upon the mountains visitant;
He hath kenned them taking wing;
And into caves where Faeries sing
He hath entered; and been told
By voices how men lived of old._
Here now and then he was visited, it may be
supposed, by old friends.  Perhaps that distinguished
son of the University of Cambridge, Gabriel Harvey, may
for a while have been his guest; he is introduced under
his pastoral name of Hobbinol, as present at the poet's
house on his return to Ireland.  The most memorable of
these visits was that already alluded to--that paid to
him in 1589 by Sir Walter Raleigh, with whom it will be
remembered he had become acquainted some nine years
before.  Raleigh, too, had received a grant from the
same huge forfeited estate, a fragment of which had
been given to Spenser.  The granting of these, and
other shares of the Desmond estates, formed part of a
policy then vigorously entertained by the English
Government--the colonising of the so lately disordered
and still restless districts of Southern Ireland.  The
recipients were termed 'undertakers;' it was one of
their duties to repair the ravages inflicted during the
recent tumults and bring the lands committed to them
into some state of cultivation and order.
The wars had been followed by a famine.  'Even in
the history of Ireland,' writes a recent biographer of
Sir Walter Raleigh, 'there are not many scenes more
full of horror that those which the historians of that
period rapidly sketch when showing us the condition of
almost the whole province of Munster in the year 1584,
and the years immediately succeeding.'{6}
The claims of his duties as an 'undertaker,' in
addition perhaps to certain troubles at court, where
his rival Essex was at this time somewhat superseding
him in the royal favour,{7} and making a temporary
absence not undesirable, brought Raleigh into Cork
County in 1589.  A full account of this visit and its
important results is given us in _Colin Clouts Come
Home Again_, which gives us at the same time a charming
picture of the poet's life at Kilcolman.  Colin
himself, lately returned home from England, tells his
brother shepherds, at their urgent request, of his
'passed fortunes.'  He begins with Raleigh's visit.
One day, he tells them, as he sat
Under the foote of Mole, that mountaine hore,
Keeping my sheepe amongst the cooly shade
Of the greene alders by the Mullaes shore,
a strange shepherd, who styled himself the Shepherd of
the Ocean --
Whether allured with my pipes delight,
Whose pleasing sound yshrilled far about,
Or thither led by chaunce, I know not right --
found him out, and
Provoked me to plaie some pleasant fit.
He sang, he tells us, a song of Mulla old father Mole's
daughter, and of another river called Bregog who loved
her.  Then his guest sang in turn:--
His song was all a lamentable lay
Of great unkindnesse and of usage hard,
Of Cynthia the ladie of the sea,
Which from her presence faultlesse him debard,
And ever and anon, with singults rife,
He cryed out, to make his undersong:
Ah! my loves queene and goddesse of my life,
Who shall me pittie when thou doest me wrong?
After they had made an end of singing, the shepherd of
the ocean
Gan to cast great lyking to my lore,
And great dislyking to my lucklesse lot
That banisht had my selfe, like wight forlore,
Into that waste where I was quite forgot,
and presently persuaded him to accompany him 'his
Cinthia to see.'
It has been seen from one of Harvey's letters that
the _Faerie Queene_ was already begun in 1580; and from
what Bryskett says, and what Spenser says himself in
his sonnets to Lord Grey, and to Lord Ormond, that it
was proceeded with after the poet had passed over to
Ireland.  By the close of the year 1589 at least three
books were completely finished.  Probably enough parts
of other books had been written; but only three were
entirely ready for publication.  No doubt part of the
conversation that passed between Spenser and Raleigh
related to Spenser's work.  It may be believed that
what was finished was submitted to Raleigh's judgment,
and certainly concluded that it elicited his warmest
approval.{8}  One great object that Spenser proposed to
himself when he assented to Raleigh's persuasion to
visit England, was the publication of the first three
books of his _Faerie Queene_.
Footnotes
---------
{1} One might quote of these poets, and those of a like
spirit, Wordsworth's lines on 'the Characteristics
of a Child three years old,' for in the respect
therein mentioned, as in others, these poets are
'as little children:'
As a faggot sparkles on the hearth,
Not less if unattended and alone,
Than when both young and old sit gathered round,
And take delight in its activity;
_Even so this happy creature of herself
Is all-sufficient; Solitude to her
Is blithe society, who fills the air
With gladness and involuntary songs._
{2} See _Colin Clouts Come Home Again_, vv. 180-184,
quoted below.
{3} This is the 'Lodovick' mentioned in Sonnet 33,
quoted below.  It was from him a little later, in
succession to the office of the Clerk of the
Government Council of Munster.  _See_ Dr. Grosart's
vol. i. p. 151.
{4} Dr. Birch refers in his note to _The Ancient and
Present State of the County and City of Cork_, by
Charles Smith, vol. i. book i. c. i. p. 58-63.
Edit. Dublin 1750, 8vo.  And Fiennes Moryson's
_Itinerary_, part ii. p. 4.
{5} Todd proposes to regard this date as a printer's
error for 1595, quite unnecessarily.
{6} Mr. Edward Edwards, 1868, I. c. vi.; see also
_Colin Clouts Come Home Again_, vv. 312-319.
{7} 'My lord of Essex hath chased Mr. Raleigh from the
court and confined him in Ireland.'--Letter, dated
August 17, 1589, from Captain Francis Allen to
Antony Bacon, Esq.--Quoted by Todd from Dr. Birch's
_Memoirs of Queen Elizabeth_.--See Mr. Edwards's
_Life of Raleigh_, I. c. viii.
{8} See Raleigh's lines entitled 'A Vision upon this
Conceipt of the _Faery Queene_,' prefixed to the
_Faerie Queene_.
Thus after an absence of about nine years, Spenser
returned for a time to England; he returned 'bringing
his sheaves with him.'  Whatever shadow of
misunderstanding had previously come between his
introducer--or perhaps re-introducer--and her Majesty
seems to have been speedily dissipated.  Raleigh
presented him to the Queen, who, it would appear,
quickly recognised his merits.  'That goddess'
To mine oaten pipe enclin'd her eare
That she thenceforth therein gan take delight,
And it desir'd at timely houres to heare
Al were my notes but rude and roughly dight.
In the Registers of the Stationers' Company for
Arber's invaluable edition of them:--
Primo Die Decembris.--Master Ponsonbye.
Entered for his Copye a book intituled the fayre
Queene, dyposed into xii bookes &c.  Aucthorysed
vnder thandes of the Archb. of Canterbery & bothe
the Wardens, vjd.
The letter of the author's prefixed to his poem
'expounding his whole intention in the course of this
worke, which for that it giveth great light to the
reader, for the better understanding is hereunto
annexed,' addressed to 'Sir Walter Raleigh, Knight,
Lord Wardein of the Stanneryes and her Maiesties
lieftenaunt in the county of Cornewayll,' is dated
January 23, 1589--that is, 1590, according to the New
Style.  Shortly afterwards, in 1590, according to both
Old and New Styles, was published by William Ponsonby
'THE FAERIE QUEENE, Disposed into twelve books,
Fashioning XII Morall vertues.'  That day, which we
spoke of as beginning to arise in 1579, now fully
dawned.  The silence of well nigh two centuries was now
broken, not again to prevail, by mighty voices.  During
Spenser's absence in Ireland, William Shakspere had
come up from the country to London.  The exact date of
his advent it seems impossible to ascertain.  Probably
enough it was 1585; but it may have been a little
later.  We may, however, be fairly sure that by the
time of Spenser's arrival in London in 1589, Shakspere
was already occupying a notable position in his
profession as an actor; and what is more important,
there can be little doubt he was already known not only
as an actor, but as a play-writer.  What he had already
written was not comparable with what he was to write
subsequently; but even those early dramas gave promise
of splendid fruits to be thereafter yielded.  In 1593
appeared _Venus and Adonis_; in the following year
_Lucrece_; in 1595, Spenser's _Epithalamion_; in 1596,
the second three books of the _Faerie Queene_; in 1597
_Romeo and Juliet_, _King Richard the Second_, and
_King Richard the Third_ were printed, and also Bacon's
_Essays_ and the first part of Hooker's _Ecclesiastical
Polity_.  During all these years various plays, of
increasing power and beauty, were proceeding from
Shakspere's hands; by 1598 about half of his extant
plays had certainly been composed.  Early in 1599, he,
who may be said to have ushered in this illustrious
period, he whose radiance first dispersed the darkness
and made the day begin to be, our poet Spenser, died.
But the day did not die with him; it was then but
approaching its noon, when he, one of its brightest
suns, set.  This day may be said to have fully broken
in the year 1590, when the first instalment of the
great work of Spenser's life made its appearance.
The three books were dedicated to the Queen.  They
were followed in the original edition--are preceded in
later editions--first, by the letter to Raleigh above
mentioned; then by six poetical pieces of a
commendatory sort, written by friends of the poet--by
Raleigh who writes two of the pieces, by Harvey who now
praises and well-wishes the poem he had discountenanced
some years before, by 'R.S.,' by 'H.B.,' by 'W.L.;'
lastly, by seventeen sonnets addressed by the poet to
various illustrious personages; to Sir Christopher
Hatton, to Lord Burghley, to the Earl of Essex, Lord
Charles Howard, Lord Grey of Wilton, Lord Buckhurst,
Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir John Norris, Knight, lord
president of Munster, Sir Walter Raleigh, the Countess
of Pembroke, and others.  The excellence of the poem
was at once generally perceived and acknowledged.
Spenser had already, as we have seen, gained great
applause by his _Shepheardes Calendar_, published some
ten years before the coming out of his greater work.
During these ten years he had resided out of England,
as has been seen; but it is not likely his reputation
had been languishing during his absence.  Webbe in his
_Discourse of English Poetrie_, 1586, had contended
'that Spenser may well wear the garlande, and step
before the best of all English poets.'  The
_Shepheardes Calendar_ had been reprinted in 1581 and
in 1586; probably enough, other works of his had been
circulating in manuscript; the hopes of the country had
been directed towards him; he was known to be engaged
in the composition of a great poem.  No doubt he found
himself famous when he reached England on the visit
suggested by Raleigh; he found a most eager expectant
audience; and when at last his _Faerie Queene_
appeared, it was received with the utmost delight and
admiration.  He was spoken of in the same year with its
appearance as the new laureate.{1}  In the spring of
the following year he received a pension from the crown
of 50_l_. per annum.  Probably, however, then, as in
later days, the most ardent appreciators of of Spenser
were the men of the same craft with himself--the men
who too, though in a different degree, or in a
different kind, possessed the 'vision and the faculty
divine.'
This great estimation of the _Faerie Queene_ was
due not only to the intrinsic charms of the poem--to
its exquisitely sweet melody, its intense pervading
sense of beauty, its abundant fancifulness, its subtle
spirituality--but also to the time of its appearance.
For then nearly two centuries no great poem had been
written in the English tongue.  Chaucer had died
heirless.  Occleve's lament over that great spirit's
decease had not been made without occasion:--
Alas my worthie maister honorable
This londis verray tresour and richesse
Deth by thy dethe hathe harm irreperable
Unto us done; hir vengeable duresse
Dispoiled hathe this londe of swetnesse
Of Rethoryk fro us; to Tullius
Was never man so like amonges us.{2}
And the doleful confession this orphaned rhymer makes
for himself, might have been well made by all the men
of his age in England:--
My dere mayster, God his soule quite,
And fader Chaucer fayne would have me taught,
But I was dull, and learned lyte or naught.
No worthy scholar had succeeded the great master.  The
fifteenth century in England had abounded in movements
of profound social and political interest--in movements
which eventually fertilised and enriched and ripened
the mind of the nation; but, not unnaturally, the
immediate literary results had been of no great value.
In the reign of Henry VIII, the condition of
literature, for various reasons, had greatly improved.
Surrey and Wyatt had heralded the advent of a brighter
era.  From their time the poetical succession had never
failed altogether.  The most memorable name in our
literature between their time and the _Faerie Queene_
is that of Sackville, Lord Buckhurst--a name of note in
the history of both our dramatic and non-dramatic
poetry.  Sackville was capable of something more than
lyrical essays.  He it was who designed the _Mirror for
Magistrates_.  To that poem, important as compared with
the poetry of its day, for its more pretentious
conception, he himself contributed the two best pieces
that form part of it--the _Induction_ and the
_Complaint of Buckingham_.  These pieces are marked by
some beauties of the same sort as those which
especially characterise Spenser; but they are but
fragments; and in spirit they belong to an age which
happily passed away shortly after the accession of
Queen Elizabeth--they are penetrated by that despondent
tone which is so strikingly audible in our literature
in the middle years of the sixteeth century, not
surprisingly, if the general history of the time be
considered.  Meanwhile, our language had changed much,
and Chaucer had grown almost unintelligible to the
ordinary reader.  Therefore, about the year 1590, the
nation was practically without a great poem.  At the
same time, it then, if ever, truly needed one.  Its
power of appreciation had been quickened and refined by
the study of the poetries of other countries; it had
translated and perused the classical writers with
enthusiasm; it had ardently pored over the poetical
literature of Italy.  Then its life had lately been
ennobled by deeds of splendid courage crowned with as
splendid success.  In the year 1590, if ever, this
country, in respect of its literary condition and in
respect of its general high and noble excitement, was
ready for the reception of a great poem.
Such a poem undoubtedly was the _Faerie Queene_,
although it may perhaps be admitted that it was a work
likely to win favour with the refined and cultured
sections of the community rather than with the
community at large.  Strongly impressed on it as were
the instant influences of the day, yet in many ways it
was marked by a certain archaic character.  It depicted
a world--the world of chivalry and romance--which was
departed; it drew its images, its forms of life, its
scenery, its very language, from the past.  Then the
genius of our literature in the latter part of Queen
Elizabeth's reign was emphatically dramatic; in the
intense life of these years men longed for reality.
Now the _Faerie Queene_ is one long idealizing.  These
circumstances are to accounted for partly by the
character of Spenser's genius, partly by the fact
already stated that chronologically Spenser is the
earliest of the great spirits of his day.  In truth he
stands between two worlds: he belongs partly to the new
time, partly to the old; he is the last of one age, he
is the first of another; he stretches out one hand into
the past to Chaucer, the other rests upon the shoulder
of Milton.
Footnotes
---------
{1} Nash's _Supplication of Pierce Pennilesse_, 1592.
{2} Skeat's _Specimens of English Literature_, p. 14.
It is easy to imagine how intensely Spenser enjoyed his
visit to London.  It is uncertain to what extent that
visit was prolonged.  He dates the dedication of his
_Colin Clouts Come Home Again_ 'from my house at
Kilcolman, the 27 of December, 1591.'  On the other
hand, the dedication of his _Daphnaida_ is dated
'London this first of Januarie 1591,' that is 1592
according to our new style.  Evidently there is some
mistake here.  Prof. Craik 'suspects' that in the
latter instance 'the date January 1591' is used in the
modern meaning; he quotes nothing to justify such a
suspicion; but it would seem to be correct.  Todd and
others have proposed to alter the '1591' in the former
instance to 1595, the year in which _Colin Clouts Come
Home Again_ was published, and with which the allusions
made in the poem to contemporary writers agree; but
this proposal is, as we shall see, scarcely tenable.
The manner in which the publisher of the _Complaints_,
introduces that work to the 'gentle reader,' seems to
show that the poet was not at the time of the
publishing easily accessible.  He speaks of having
endeavoured 'by all good meanes (for the better
encrease and accomplishment of your delights) to get
into my hands such small poems of the same authors, as
I heard were disperst abroad in sundrie hands, and not
easie to bee come by by himselfe; some of them having
been diverslie imbeziled and purloyned from him since
his departure ouer sea.'  He says he understands
Spenser 'wrote sundrie others' besides those now
collected, 'besides some other Pamphlets looselie
scattered abroad . . . which when I can either by
himselfe or otherwise attaine too I meane likewise for
your fauour sake to set foorth.'  It may be supposed
with much probability that Spenser returned to his
Irish castle some time in 1591, in all likelihood after
February, in which month he received the pension
mentioned above, and on the other hand so as to have
time to write the original draught of _Colin Clouts
Come Home Again_ before the close of December.
The reception of the _Faerie Queene_ had been so
favourable that in 1591--it would seem, as has been
shown, after Spenser's departure--the publisher of that
poem determined to put forth what other poems by the
same hand he could gather together.  The result was a
volume entitled '_Complaints_, containing sundrie small
Poemes of the Worlds Vanitie, whereof the next page
maketh mention.  By Ed. Sp.' 'The next page' contains
'a note of the Sundrie Poemes contained in this
volume:'
In a short notice addressed to the Gentle Reader which
follows--the notice just referred to--the publisher of
the volume mentions other works by Spenser, and
promises to publish them too 'when he can attain to'
them.  These works are _Ecclesiastes_, _The Seven
Psalms_, and _Canticum Canticorum_--these three no
doubt translations of parts of the Old Testament--_A
Sennight Slumber_, _The State of Lovers_, the _Dying
Pelican_--doubtless the work mentioned, as has been
seen, in one of Spenser's letters to Harvey--_The
Howers of the Lord_, and _The Sacrifice of a Sinner_.
Many of these works had probably been passing from hand
to hand in manuscript for many years.  That old method
of circulation survived the invention of the printing
press for many generations.  The perils of it may be
illustrated from the fate of the works just mentioned.
It would seem that the publisher never did attain to
them; and they have all perished.  With regard to the
works which were printed and preserved, the _Ruines of
Time_, as the Dedication shows, was written during
Spenser's memorable visit of 1589-91 to England.  It is
in fact an elegy dedicated to the Countess of Pembroke,
on the death of Sir Philip Sidney, 'that most brave
Knight, your most noble brother deceased.'  'Sithens my
late cumming into England,' the poet writes in the
Epistle Dedicatorie, 'some friends of mine (which might
much prevaile with me and indeede commaund me) knowing
with howe straight bandes of duetie I was tied to him;
as also bound unto that noble house (of which the
chiefe hope then rested in him) have sought to revive
them by upbraiding me; for that I have not shewed anie
thankefull remembrance towards him or any of them; but
suffer their names to sleepe in silence and
forgetfulnesse.  Whome chieflie to satisfie, or els to
avoide that fowle blot of unthankefulnesse, I have
conceived this small Poeme, intituled by a generall
name of the _Worlds Ruines_: yet speciallie intended to
the renowming of that noble race from which both you
and he sprong, and to the eternizing of some of the
chiefe of them late deceased.'  This poem is written in
a tone that had been extremely frequent during
Spenser's youth.  Its text is that ancient one 'Vanity
of Vanities; all is Vanity'--a very obvious text in all
ages, but perhaps especially so, as has been hinted, in
the sixteenth century, and one very frequently adopted
at that time.  This text is treated in a manner
characteristic of the age.  It is exemplified by a
series of visions.  The poet represents himself as
seeing at Verulam an apparition of a woman weeping over
the decay of that ancient town.  This woman stands for
the town itself.  Of its whilome glories, she says,
after a vain recounting of them,
They all are gone and with them is gone,
Ne ought to me remaines, but to lament
My long decay.
No one, she continues, weeps with her, no one remembers
her,
Save one that maugre fortunes injurie
And times decay, and enuies cruell tort
Hath writ my record in true seeming sort.
Cambden the nourice of antiquitie,
And lanterne unto late succeeding age,
To see the light of simple veritie
Buried in ruines, through the great outrage
Of her owne people, led with warlike rage,
Cambden, though time all moniments obscure,
Yet thy just labours ever shall endure.
Then she rebukes herself for these selfish moanings by
calling to mind how far from solitary she is in her
desolation.  She recalls to mind the great ones of the
land who have lately fallen--Leicester, and Warwick,
and Sidney--and wonders no longer at her own ruin.  Is
not _Transit Gloria_ the lesson taught everywhere?
Then other visions and emblems of instability are seen,
some of them not darkly suggesting that what passes
away from earth and apparently ends may perhaps be
glorified elsewhere.  The second of these collected
poems--_The Teares of the Muses_--dedicated, as we have
seen, to one of the poet's fair cousins, the Lady
Strange, deplores the general intellectual condition of
the time.  It is doubtful whether Spenser fully
conceived what a brilliant literary age was beginning
about the year 1590.  Perhaps his long absence in
Ireland, the death of Sidney who was the great hope of
England Spenser knew, the ecclesiastical controversies
raging when he revisited England, may partly account
for his despondent tone with reference to literature.
He introduces each Muse weeping for the neglect and
contempt suffered by her respective province.  He who
describes these tears was himself destined to dry them;
and Shakspere, who, if anyone, was to make the faces of
the Muses blithe and bright, was now rapidly
approaching his prime.  There can be little doubt that
at a later time Spenser was acquainted with Shakspere;
for Spenser was an intimate friend of the Earl of
Essex; Shakspere was an intimate friend of the Earl of
Southampton, who was one of the most attached friends
of that Earl of Essex.  And a personal acquaintance
with Shakspere may have been one of the most memorable
events of Spenser's visit to London in 1589.  We would
gladly think that Thalia in the _Teares of the Muses_
refers in the following passage to Shakspere: the comic
stage, she says, is degraded,
And he the man whom Nature selfe had made
To mock herselfe and Truth to imitate,
With kindly counter under Mimick shade,
Our pleasant Willy, ah! is dead of late;
With whom all joy and jolly meriment
Is also deaded and in dolour drent.
The context shows that by 'dead' is not meant physical
death, but that
That same gentle spirit, from whose pen
Large streames of honnie and sweete nectar flowe,
produces nothing, sits idle-handed and silent, rather
than pander to the grosser tastes of the day.  But this
view, attractive as it is, can perhaps hardly be
maintained.  Though the _Teares of the Muses_ was not
published, as we have seen, till 1591, it was probably
written some years earlier, and so before the star of
Shakspere had arisen.  Possibly by Willy is meant Sir
Philip Sidney, a favourite haunt of whose was his
sister's house at Wilton on the river Wiley or Willey,
and who had exhibited some comic power in his masque,
_The Lady of May_, acted before the Queen in 1578.
Some scholars, however, take 'Willy' to denote John
Lily.  Thus the passage at present remains dark.  If
written in 1590, it certainly cannot mean Sidney, who
had been dead some years; just possibly, but not
probably, it might in that case mean Shakspere.
Of the remaining works published in his
_Complaints_, the only other one of recent composition
is _Muiopotmos_, which, as Prof. Craik suggests, would
seem to be an allegorical narrative of some matter
recently transpired.  It is dated 1590, but nothing is
known of any earlier edition than that which appears in
the _Complaints_.  Of the other pieces by far the most
interesting is _Prosopopoia, or Mother Hubbards Tale_,
not only because it is in it, as has been said, Spenser
most carefully, though far from successfully, imitates
his great master Chaucer, but for its intrinsic merit--
for its easy style, its various incidents, its social
pictures.  In the dedication he speaks of it as 'These
my idle labours; which having _long sithens composed in
the raw conceipt of my youth_, I lately amongst other
papers lighted upon, and was by others, which liked the
same, mooved to set them foorth.'  However long before
its publication the poem in the main was written,
possibly some additions were made to it in or about the
year 1590; as for instance, the well-known passage
describing 'a suitor's state,' which reflects too
clearly a bitter personal experience to have been
composed before Spenser had grown so familiar with the
Court as he became during his visit to England under
Raleigh's patronage.  But it is conceivable that his
experiences in 1578 and 1579 inspired the lines in
question.
The remaining pieces in the _Complaints_ consist
of translations or imitations, composed probably some
years before, though probably in some cases, as has
been shown, revised or altogether recast.
Probably in the same year with the _Complaints_--
that is in 1591--was published _Daphnaida_,{1} 'an
Elegie upon the death of the noble and vertuous Douglas
Howard, daughter and heire of Henry Lord Howard,
Viscount Byndon, and wife of Arthur Georges, Esquire.'
This elegy was no doubt written before Spenser returned
to Ireland.  It is marked by his characteristic
diffuseness, abundance, melody.
Certainly before the close of the year 1591
Spenser found himself once more in his old castle of
Kilcolman.  A life at Court could never have suited
him, however irksome at times his isolation in Ireland
may have seemed.  When his friends wondered at his
returning unto
This barrein soyle,
Where cold and care and penury do dwell,
Here to keep sheepe with hunger and with toyle,
he made the answer that he,
Whose former dayes
Had in rude fields bene altogether spent,
Durst not adventure such unknowen wayes,
Nor trust the guile of fortunes blandishment;
But rather chose back to my sheepe to tourne,
Whose utmost hardnesse I before had tryde,
Then, having learnd repentance late, to mourne
Emongst those wretches which I there descryde.
That life, with all its intrigues and self-seekings and
scandals, had no charms for him.  Once more settled in
his home, he wrote an account of his recent absence
from it, which he entitled _Colin Clouts Come Home
Again_.  This poem was not published till 1595; but,
whatever additions were subsequently made to it, there
can be no doubt it was originally written immediately
after his return to Ireland.  Sitting in the quiet to
which he was but now restored, he reviewed the splendid
scenes he had lately witnessed; he recounted the famous
wits he had met, and the fair ladies he had seen in the
great London world; and dedicated this exquisite diary
to the friend who had introduced him into that
brilliant circle.  It would seem that Raleigh had
accused him of indolence.  That ever-restless schemer
could not appreciate the poet's dreaminess.  'That you
may see,' writes Spenser, 'that I am not alwaies ydle
as yee think, though not greatly well occupied, nor
altogither undutifull, though not precisely officious,
I make you present of this simple pastorall, unworthie
of your higher conceipt for the meanesse of the stile,
but agreeing with the truth in circumstance and matter.
The which I humbly beseech you to accept in part of
paiment of the infinite debt in which I acknowledge
myselfe bounden unto you for your singular favours and
sundrie good turnes shewed to me at my late being in
England, &c.'
The conclusion of this poem commemorates, as we
have seen, Spenser's enduring affection for that
Rosalind who so many years before had turned away her
ears from his suit.  It must have been some twelve
months after those lines were penned, that the writer
conceived an ardent attachment for one Elizabeth.  The
active research of Dr. Grosart has discovered that this
lady belonged to the Boyle family--a family already of
importance and destined to be famous.  The family seat
was at Kilcoran, near Youghal, and so we understand
Spenser's singing of 'The sea that neighbours to her
near.'  Thus she lived in the same county with her
poet.  The whole course of the wooing and the winning
is portrayed in the _Amoretti or Sonnets_ and the
_Epithalamium_.  It may be gathered from these
biographically and otherwise interesting pieces, that
it was at the close of the year 1592 that the poet was
made a captive of that beauty he so fondly describes.
The first three sonnets would seem to have been written
in that year.  The fourth celebrates the beginning of
the year 1593--the beginning according to our modern
way of reckoning.  All through that year 1593 the lover
sighed, beseeched, adored, despaired, prayed again.
Fifty-eight sonnets chronicle the various hopes and
fears of that year.  The object of his passion remained
as steel and flint, while he wept and wailed and
pleaded.  His life was a long torment.
In vaine I seeke and sew to her for grace
And doe myne humbled hart before her poure;
The whiles her foot she in my necke doth place
And tread my life downe in the lowly floure.
In Lent she is his 'sweet saynt,' and he vows to find
some fit service for her.
Her temple fayre is built within my mind
In which her glorious image placed is.
But all his devotion profited nothing, and he thinks it
were better 'at once to die.'  He marvels at her
cruelty.  He cannot address himself to further
composition of his great poem.  The accomplishment of
that great work were
Sufficient werke for one man's simple head,
All were it, as the rest, but rudely writ.
How then should I, without another wit,
Thinck ever to endure so tedious toyle?
Sith that this one is tost with troublous fit
Of a proud love that doth my spirit spoyle.
He falls ill in his body too.  When the anniversary of
his being carried into captivity comes round, he
declares, as has already been quoted, that the year
just elapsed has appeared longer than all the forty
years of his life that had preceded it (sonnet 60).  In
the beginning of the year 1594,
After long stormes and tempests sad assay
Which hardly I endured hertofore
In dread of death and daungerous dismay
With which my silly bark was tossed sore,
he did 'at length descry the happy shore.'  The heart
of his mistress softened towards him.  The last twenty-
five sonnets are for the most part the songs of a lover
accepted and happy.  It would seem that by this time he
had completed three more books of the _Faerie Queene_,
and he asks leave in sonnet 70,
In pleasant mew
To sport my Muse and sing my loves sweet praise,
The contemplation of whose heavenly hew
My spirit to an higher pitch doth raise.
Probably the Sixth Book was concluded in the first part
of the year 1594, just after his long wooing had been
crowned with success.  In the tenth canto of that book
he introduces the lady of his love, and himself
'piping' unto her.  In a rarely pleasant place on a
fair wooded hill-top Calidore sees the Graces dancing,
and Colin Clout piping merrily.  With these goddesses
is a fourth maid; it is to her alone that Colin
pipes:--
Pype, jolly shepheard, pype thou now apace
Unto thy love that made thee low to lout;
Thy love is present there with thee in place;
Thy love is there advaunst to be another Grace.
Of this fourth maid the poet, after sweetly praising
the daughters of sky-ruling Jove, sings in this wise:--
Who can aread what creature mote she bee;
Whether a creature or a goddesse graced
With heavenly gifts from heven first enraced?
But what so sure she was, she worthy was
To be the fourth with those three other placed,
Yet she was certes but a countrey lasse;
Yet she all other countrey lasses farre did passe.
So farre, as doth the daughter of the day
All other lesser lights in light excell;
So farre doth she in beautyfull array
Above all other lasses beare the bell;
Ne lesse in vertue that beseems her well
Doth she exceede the rest of all her race.
The phrase 'country lass' in this rapturous passage has
been taken to signify that she to whom it applied was
of mean origin; but it scarcely bears this
construction.  Probably all that is meant is that her
family was not connected with the Court or the Court
circle.  She was not high-born; but she was not low-
born.  The final sonnets refer to some malicious
reports circulating about him, and to some local
separation between the sonneteer and his mistress.
This separation was certainly ended in the June
following his acceptance--that is, the June of 1594;
for in that month, on St. Barnabas' day, that is, on
the 11th, Spenser was married.  This event Spenser
celebrates in the finest, the most perfect of all his
poems, in the most beautiful of all bridal songs--in
his _Epithalamion_.  He had many a time sung for
others; he now bade the Muses crown their heads with
garlands and help him his own love's praises to
resound:--
So I unto my selfe alone will sing,
The woods shall to me answer, and my echo ring.
Then, with the sweetest melody and a refinement and
grace incomparable, he sings with a most happy heart of
various matters of the marriage day--of his love's
waking, of the merry music of the minstrels, of her
coming forth in all the pride of her visible
loveliness, of that 'inward beauty of her lively
spright' which no eyes can see, of her standing before
the altar, her sad eyes still fastened on the ground,
of the bringing her home, of the rising of the evening
star, and the fair face of the moon looking down on his
bliss not unfavourably, as he would hope.  The
_Amoretti_ and _Epithalamion_ were registered at the
Stationers' Hall on the 19th of November following the
marriage.  They were published in 1595, Spenser--as
appears from the 'Dedication' of them to Sir Robert
Needham, written by the printer Ponsonby--being still
absent from England.
Meanwhile the poet had been vexed by other
troubles besides those of a slowly requited passion.
Mr. Hardiman,{2} in his _Irish Minstrelsy_, has
published three petitions presented in 1593 to the Lord
Chancellor of Ireland by Maurice, Lord Roche, Viscount
Fermoy, two against 'one Edmond Spenser, gentleman',
one against one Joan Ny Callaghan--who is said to act
'by supportation and maintenance of Edmond Spenser,
gentleman, a heavy adversary to your suppliant.'
'Where,' runs the first petition, 'one Edmond Spenser,
gentleman, hath lately exhibited suit against your
suppliant for three ploughlands, parcels of
Shanballymore (your suppliant's inheritance) before the
Vice-President and Council of Munster, which land hath
been heretofore decreed for your suppliant against the
said Spenser and others under whom he conveyed; and
nevertheless for that the said Spenser, being Clerk of
the Council in the said province, and did assign his
office unto one Nicholas Curteys among other agreements
with covenant that during his life he should be free in
the said office for his causes, by occasion of which
immunity he doth multiply suits against your suppliant
in the said province upon pretended title of others
&c.' The third petition averred that 'Edmond Spenser of
Kilcolman, gentleman, hath entered into three
ploughlands, parcel of Ballingerath, and disseised your
suppliant thereof, and continueth by countenance and
greatness the possession thereof, and maketh great
waste of the wood of the said land, and converteth a
great deal of corn growing thereupon to his proper use,
to the damage of the complainant of two hundred pounds
sterling.  Whereunto,' continues the document, which is
preserved in the Original Rolls Office, 'the said
Edmond Spenser appearing in person had several days
prefixed unto him peremptorily to answer, which he
neglected to do.'  Therefore 'after a day of grace
given,' on the 12th of February, 1594, Lord Roche was
decreed the possession.  Perhaps the absence from his
lady love referred to in the concluding sonnets was
occasioned by this litigation.  Perhaps also the 'false
forged lyes'--the malicious reports circulated about
him--referred to in Sonnet 85, may have been connected
with these appeals against him.  It is clear that all
his dreams of Faerie did not make him neglectful of his
earthly estate.  Like Shakspere, like Scott, Spenser
did not cease to be a man of the world--we use the
phrase in no unkindly sense--because he was a poet.  He
was no mere visionary, helpless in the ordinary affairs
of life.  In the present case it would appear that he
was even too keen in looking after his own interests.
Professor Craik charitably suggests that his poverty
'rather than rapacity may be supposed to have urged
whatever of hardness there was in his proceedings.'  It
is credible enough that these proceedings made him
highly unpopular with the native inhabitants of the
district, and that they were not forgotten when the day
of reckoning came.  'His name,' says Mr. Hardiman, on
the authority of _Trotter's Walks in Ireland_,{3} 'is
still remembered in the vicinity of Kilcolman; but the
people entertain no sentiments of respect or affection
for his memory.'
In the same year with the _Amoretti_ was published
_Colin Clouts Come Home Again_, several additions
having been made to the original version.
Probably at the close of this year 1595 Spenser a
second time crossed to England, accompanied, it may be
supposed, by his wife, carrying with him in manuscript
the second three books of his _Faerie Queene_, which,
as we have seen, were completed before his marriage,
and also a prose work, _A View of the Present State of
Ireland_.  Mr. Collier quotes the following entry from
the Stationers' Register:--
&c. The Second Part of the Faerie Queene, cont.
the 4, 5, and 6 bookes, vj_d_.
This second instalment--which was to be the last--of
his great poem was duly published in that year.  The
_View of the Present State of Ireland_ was not
registered till April 1598, and then only
conditionally.  It was not actually printed till 1633.
During his stay in England he wrote the _Hymns to
Heavenly Love and Heavenly Beauty_, and the
_Prothalamion_, which were to be his last works.
More than four years had elapsed since Spenser had
last visited London.  During that period certain
memorable works had been produced; the intellectual
power of that day had expressed itself in no mean
manner.  When he arrived in London towards the close of
the year 1595, he would find Shakspere splendidly
fulfilling the promise of his earlier days; he would
find Ben Jonson just becoming known to fame; he would
find Bacon already drawing to him the eyes of his time.
Spenser probably spent the whole of the year 1596, and
part of 1597, in England.  In 1597 appeared, as has
already been said, the first part of Hooker's
_Ecclesiastical Polity_, and Bacon's _Essays_, and also
Jonson's _Every Man in His Own Humour_.
The reigning favourite at this time was the Earl
of Essex.  In 1596 his successful descent upon Cadiz
raised him to the zenith of his fame.  With this
nobleman Spenser was on terms of intimacy.  At his
London house in the Strand--a house which had
previously been inhabited by Spenser's earlier patron,
the Earl of Leicester--it stood where Essex Street now
is, and is still represented by the two pillars which
stand at the bottom of that street--Spenser no doubt
renewed his friendship with Shakspere.  This intimacy
with Essex, with whatever intellectual advantages it
may have been attended, with whatever bright spirits it
may have brought Spenser acquainted, probably impeded
his prospects of preferment.  There can be no doubt
that one of the motives that brought him to England was
a desire to advance his fortunes.  Camden describes him
as always poor.  His distaste for his residence in
Ireland could not but have been aggravated by his
recent legal defeat.  But he looked in vain for further
preferment.  He had fame, and to spare, and this was to
suffice.  It was during this sojourn in England that he
spoke of himself, as we have seen, as one
Whom sullein care
Through discontent of my long fruitlesse stay
In Princes court and expectation vayne
Of idle hopes which still doe fly away
Like empty shaddows, did afflict my brayne.
The publication of the second three books of the
_Faerie Queene_, with a re-impression of the first
three books, placed him on the highest pinnacle of
fame.  Its plentiful references to passing events--its
adumbrations of the history of the time--however it
might damage the permanent value of the work from an
artistic point of view, increased its immediate
popularity.  How keenly these references were
appreciated appears from the anxiety of the Scotch King
to have the poet prosecuted for his picture of Duessa,
in whom Mary Queen of Scots was generally recognised.
'Robert Bowes, the English ambassador in Scotland,
writing to Lord Burghley from Edinburgh 12th November,
King against Edmund Spenser for publishing in print, in
the second part of the _Faery Queen_, ch. 9, some
dishonourable effects, as the King deemed, against
himself and his mother deceased.  Mr. Bowes states that
he had satisfied the King as to the privilege under
which the book was published, yet he still desired that
Edmund Spenser for this fault might be tried and
punished.  It further appears, from a letter from
George Nicolson to Sir Robert Cecil, dated Edinburgh,
answering Spenser's book, whereat the King was
offended.'{4}
The _View of the Present State of Ireland_,
written dialogue-wise between Eudoxus and Iren{ae}us,
though not printed, as has been said, till 1633, seems
to have enjoyed a considerable circulation in a
manuscript form.  There are manuscript copies of this
tractate at Cambridge, at Dublin, at Lambeth, and in
the British Museum.  It is partly antiquarian, partly
descriptive, partly political.  It exhibits a profound
sense of the unsatisfactory state of the country--a
sense which was presently to be justified in a
frightful manner.  Spenser had not been deaf to the
ever-growing murmurs of discontent by which he and his
countrymen had been surrounded.  He was not in advance
of his time in the policy he advocates for the
administration of Ireland.  He was far from
anticipating that policy of conciliation whose
triumphant application it may perhaps be the signal
honour of our own day to achieve.  The measures he
proposes are all of a vigorously repressive kind; they
are such measures as belong to a military occupancy,
not to a statesmanly administration.  He urges the
stationing numerous garrisons; he is for the abolishing
native customs.  Such proposals won a not unfavourable
hearing at that time.  They have been admired many a
time since.
It is to this work of Spenser's that Protector
Cromwell alludes in a letter to his council in Ireland,
in favour of William Spenser, grandson of Edmund
Spenser, from whom an estate of lands in the barony of
Fermoy, in the county of Cork, descended on him.  'His
grandfather,' he writes, 'was that Spenser who, by his
writings touching the reduction of the Irish to
civility, brought on him the odium of that nation; and
for those works and his other good services Queen
Elizabeth conferred on him that estate which the said
William Spenser now claims.'{5}  This latter statement
is evidently inaccurate.  Spenser, as we have seen, had
already held his estate for some years when he brought
his _View_ to England.
Spenser dates the dedication of his _Hymns_ from
Greenwich, September 1, 1596.  Of these four hymns, two
had been in circulation for some years, though now for
the first time printed; the other two now first
appeared.  'Having in the greener times of my youth,'
he writes, 'composed these former two hymnes in the
praise of love and beautie, and finding that the same
too much pleased those of like age and disposition,
which being too vehemently caried with that kind of
affection, do rather sucke out poyson to their strong
passion than hony to their honest delight, I was moved
Margaret, Countess of Cumberland, Mary, Countess of
reason that many copies thereof were formerly scattered
abroad, I resolved at least to amend, and by way of
retraction to reforme them, making (instead of those
two hymnes of earthly or naturall love and beautie) two
others of heavenly and celestiall.'  This passage is
interesting for the illustration it provides of
Spenser's popularity.  It is also highly interesting,
if the poems themselves be read in the light of it, as
showing the sensitive purity of the poet's nature.  It
is difficult to conceive how those 'former hymns'
should in any moral respect need amending.  The
moralising and corrective purpose with which the two
latter were written perhaps diminished their poetical
beauty; but the themes they celebrate are such as
Spenser could not but ever descant upon with delight;
they were such as were entirely congenial to his
spirit.  He here set forth special teachings of his
great master Plato, and abandoned himself to the high
spiritual contemplations he loved.  But perhaps the
finest of these four hymns is the second--that in
honour of Beauty.  Beauty was indeed the one worship of
Spenser's life--not mere material beauty--not 'the
goodly hew of white and red with which the cheekes are
sprinkled,' or 'the sweete rosy leaves so fairly spred
upon the lips,' or 'that golden wyre,' or 'those
sparckling stars so bright,' but that inner spiritual
beauty, of which fair hair and bright eyes are but
external expressions.
So every spirit, as it is most pure
And hath in it the more of heavenly light,
So it the fairer bodie doth procure
To habit in, and it more fairely dight
With chearfull grace and amiable sight;
For of the soule the bodie forme doth take,
For soule is forme and doth the bodie make.
This hymn is one of high refined rapture.
Before the close of the year 1596 Spenser wrote
and published the _Prothalamion_ or 'A spousall verse
made in honour of the double marriage of the two
honourable and vertuous ladies, the ladie Elizabeth,
and the ladie Katherine Somerset, daughters to the
right honourable the Earle of Worcester, and espoused
to the two worthie gentlemen, M. Henry Gilford and M.
William Peter Esquyers.'  It was composed after the
return of Essex from Spain, for he is introduced in the
poem as then residing at his house in the Strand.  It
is a poem full of grace and beauty, and of matchless
melodiousness.
This is the last complete poem Spenser wrote.  No
doubt he entertained the idea of completing his _Faerie
Queene_; and perhaps it was after 1596 that he composed
the two additional cantos, which are all, so far as is
known, that he actually wrote.  But the last poem
completed and published in his lifetime was the
_Prothalamion_.
This second visit to England at last came to an
end.  It was probably in 1597 that he returned once
more to Kilcolman.  In the following year he was
recommended by her Majesty for Sheriff of Cork.  But
his residence in Ireland was now to be rudely
terminated.
The Irishry had, ever since the suppression of
Desmond's rebellion in 1582, been but waiting for
another opportunity to rise, that suppression not
having brought pacification in its train.  In the
autumn of 1598 broke out another of these fearful
insurrections, of which the history of English rule in
Ireland is mainly composed.
In the September of that year Spenser was at the
zenith of his prosperity.  In that month arrived the
letter recommending his appointment to be Sheriff of
Cork.  It seems legitimate to connect this mark of
royal favour with the fact that at the beginning of the
preceding month Lord Burghley had deceased.  The great
obstructor of the Queen's bounty was removed, and
Spenser might hope that now, at last, the hour of his
prosperity was come.  So far as is known, his domestic
life was serene and happy.  The joys of the husband had
been crowned with those of the father.  Two sons, as
may be gathered from the names given to them--they were
christened Sylvanus and Peregrine--had been by this
time born to him; according to Sir William Betham, who
drew up a pedigree of Spenser's family, another son and
a daughter had been born between the birth of Sylvanus
and that of Peregrine.  Then he was at this time the
recognised prince of living poets.  The early autumn of
happinesses.
In October the insurgents burst roughly in upon
his peace.  No doubt his occupation of the old castle
of Desmond had ever been regarded with fierce jealousy.
While he had dreamed his dreams and sung his songs in
the valley, there had been curses muttered against him
from the hills around.  At last the day of vengeance
came.  The outraged natives rushed down upon Kilcolman;
the poet and his family barely made their escape; his
home was plundered and burned.  According to Ben
Jonson, in the conversation with Drummond, quoted
above, not all his family escaped; one little child,
new born, perished in the flames.  But, indeed, the
fearfulness of this event needs no exaggeration.  In
profound distress Spenser arrived once more in London,
bearing a despatch from Sir Thomas Norreys, President
of Munster, to the Secretary of State, and of course
himself full of direct and precise information as to
the Irish tumult, having also drawn up an address to
the Queen on the subject.  Probably, the hardships and
horrors he had undergone completely prostrated him.  On
January 16, 1599, he died in Westminster.  As to the
exact place, a manuscript note found by Brand, the
well-known antiquary, on the title-page of a copy of
the second edition of the _Faerie Queene_, though not
of indisputable value, may probably enough be accepted,
and it names King Street.  Ben Jonson says, 'he died
for lack of bread;' but this must certainly be an
exaggeration.  No doubt he returned to England
'inops'--in a state of poverty--as Camden says; but it
is impossible to believe that he died of starvation.
His friend Essex and many another were ready to
minister to his necessities if he needed their
ministry.  Jonson's story is that he 'refused twenty
pieces sent him by my lord Essex, and said he was sure
he had no time to spend them.'  This story, if it is
anything more than a mere vulgar rumour, so far as it
shows anything, shows that he was in no such very
extreme need of succour.  Had his destitution been so
complete, he would have accepted the pieces for his
family, even though 'he had no time to spend them
himself.'  It must be remembered that he was still in
receipt of a pension from the crown; a pension of no
very considerable amount, perhaps, but still large
enough to satisfy the pangs of hunger.  But numerous
passages might be quoted to show that he died in
somewhat straitened circumstances.
It was said, some thirty-four years after
Spenser's death, that in his hurried flight from
Ireland the remaining six books of the _Faerie Queene_
were lost.  But it is very unlikely that those books
were ever completed.{6}  Perhaps some fragments of them
may have perished in the flames at Kilcolman--certainly
only two cantos have reached us.  These were first
printed in 1611, when the first six books were
republished.  The general testimony of his
contemporaries is that his song was broken off in the
midst.  Says Browne in his _Britannia's Pastorals_
(Book ii. s. 1):--
But ere he ended his melodious song,
An host of angels flew the cloud among,
And rapt this swan from his attentive mates
To make him one of their associates
In heaven's faire choir.
One S. A. Cokain writes:--
If, honour'd Colin, thou hadst lived so long
As to have finished thy Fairy song,
Not only mine but all tongues would confess,
Thou hadst exceeded old M{ae}onides.
He was buried near Chaucer--by his own wish, it is
said--in Westminster Abbey, 'poetis funus ducentibus,'
with poets following him to the grave--bearing the
pall, as we might say--the Earl of Essex furnishing the
funeral expenses, according to Camden.  It would seem
from a passage in Browne's _Britannia's Pastorals_
'that the Queen ordered a monument to be erected over
him, but that the money was otherwise appropriated by
one of her agents.'  The present monument, restored in
His widow married again before 1603, as we learn
from a petition presented to the Lord Chancellor of
Ireland in that year, in which Sylvanus sues to recover
from her and her husband Roger Seckerstone certain
documents relating to the paternal estate.  She was
again a widow in 1606.  Till a very recent time there
were descendants of Spenser living in the south of
Ireland.
Revised 1896.
Footnotes
---------
{1} This poem is in this volume reprinted from the
edition of 1591.  Mr. Morris thinks that Todd was
not aware of this edition.  Mr. Collier reprinted
from the 2nd edition--that of 1593.
{2} _Irish Minstrelsy; or, Bardic Remains of Ireland_,
by J. Hardiman.  London, 1831.
{3} 'The name and occupation of Spenser is handed down
traditionally among them (the Irish); but they seem
to entertain no sentiments of respect or affection
for his memory; the bard came in rather ungracious
times, and the keen recollections of this untutored
people are wonderful.'--Trotter's _Walks through
Ireland in the Years 1812, 1814, and 1817_.
London, 1819, p. 302.
{4} Cooper's _Athen. Cantab._
{5} See Mr. Edwards's _Life of Raleigh_, vol. i. p.
{6} No doubt he intended to complete his work.  See
book vi. canto v. st. 2:
'When time shall be to tell the same;'
but this time never was.