-Greek transliterations have an "=" sign before and after
ART _of_ POLITICKS
(_1729_)
_Introduction by_
_1976_
William E. Conway, William Andrews Clark Memorial Library
George Robert Guffey, University of California, Los Angeles
Maximillian E. Novak, University of California, Los Angeles
David S. Rodes, University of California, Los Angeles
James L. Clifford, Columbia University
Ralph Cohen, University of Virginia
Vinton A. Dearing, University of California, Los Angeles
Arthur Friedman, University of Chicago
Louis A. Landa, Princeton University
Earl Miner, Princeton University
Samuel H. Monk, University of Minnesota
Everett T. Moore, University of California, Los Angeles
Lawrence Clark Powell, William Andrews Clark Memorial Libr
James Sutherland, University College, London
H. T. Swedenberg, Jr., University of California, Los Angeles
Robert Vosper, William Andrews Clark Memorial Library
Beverly J. Onley, William Andrews Clark Memorial Library
The meagre information known about James Bramston's life has been ably
summarized by F. P. Lock in his introduction to _The Man of Taste_ (ARS
have been acquainted with Pope, who saw _The Art of Politicks_ before
Pope through John Caryll, whose Sussex estate, Lady-Holt, was in the
neighborhood of Bramston's parishes.
_The Art of Politicks_, Bramston's first English poem, was published
December. Several reimpressions followed, as did another London
edition, one from Edinburgh, and two from Dublin, all dated 1729, and a
_Collection of Poems, by Several Hands_ (1748), where it was attributed
to Bramston, and in John Bell's _Classical Arrangement of Fugitive
Dodsley's _Collection_, with a few rather uninformative manuscript
notes, is now in the British Library (C.117.aa.16).
It seems likely that the poem was completed in the summer of 1729. The
most recent events that Bramston alludes to are Thomas Woolston's trial
for blasphemy of 4 March (p. 27) and Sir Paul Methuen's resignation as
Treasurer of the King's Household, which was reported in May (p.
Horace's _Ars Poetica_ was one of the most fertile sources for
eighteenth-century imitations and adaptations. Some were completely
serious attempts to marry one art to another or to show that all arts
share the same fundamental principles; an example of this type is John
Gwynn's _Art of Architecture_ (1742; ARS 144). Others, like William
King's _Art of Cookery_ (1708) are downright burlesques.
Bramston's usual method falls somewhere between these extremes. He
often uses the dignity of poetry to show up the indignity of politics
or political writing, as on pp. 5-6 where Horace's advice on choice of
subject is transformed into advice to "_Weekly Writers_ of seditious
_News_," or on page 7, where the rise and fall of South Sea stock fills
the place of Horace's famous comparison of archaic and new-coined words
to the leaves of the forest. But Bramston's poem more often aspires to
the same level as its model; in this respect it resembles _Absalom and
Achitophel_ more than _Mac Flecknoe_.
Several factors help to bring _Ars Poetica_ and _The Art of Politicks_
together. Perhaps most important, Bramston conceives of politics
primarily as a verbal art, the use of speech to persuade others to a
course of action. Bribes and other crasser incentives appear in the
poem, of course, but they are clearly the result of declining
standards. For Bramston, rhetoric should govern politics; the House of
Commons is a reincarnation of a Roman senate or courtroom. Bramston's
inclusion of political writing as well as politics itself in his poem
also helps to keep him in Horace's orbit. On Horace's side, his
conception of poetry is basically rhetorical and persuasive; it should
instruct and delight, move to laughter or tears. Horace's readiness to
digress into literary history gives Bramston many opportunities to
bring in political history. The _Ars Poetica_ is very much concerned
with the world of men; poets are seen in their social roles, and
Horace's standards of literary decorum are usually based on social
norms: young men in plays should behave the way young men are observed
to behave in real life. The _Ars Poetica_ also contains several sharp
satiric darts; Horace's contrast between the eloquence of ancient
Greece and the commercial arithmetic of modern Rome slides easily into
a contrast between Elizabethan learning and Hanoverian place-hunting
(pp.32-33). Finally, Horace's urbane and chatty style is as suitable
for other subjects as it is for poetry. To appreciate Horace's
adaptability, one need only imagine the difficulty of writing an art of
politics in imitation of Archibald MacLeish's "Ars Poetica" or
Aristotle's _Poetics_.
Though he does not pretend to Pope's image of himself as a new Horace
bringing the whole weight of Roman tradition to bear on contemporary
society, Bramston is very clever on the local level at transposing
Horace for his own purposes. Horace recounts the increasing complexity
and sophistication of theatrical music, Bramston the increasingly
elaborated musical celebrations of victorious candidates (pp. 22-23),
and Horace's implication that the sophistication of taste is really a
decline--"an impetuous style brought in an unwonted diction"
Bramston's page 27 corresponds to Horace's brief history of the
theatre, from Thespis's tragedies that he staged on wagons to the
silencing of the excessively outspoken chorus of Old Comedy (275-84).
Bramston replaces Thespis with Defoe, and the wagon-mounted stage with
the cart and pillory. Instead of deploring the silencing of the chorus,
Bramston applauds the silencing of Woolston. The contrast between
Thespis and Defoe is clearly mock-heroic, but Bramston implies that
Woolston's similarity to an ancient satyr is a decline from the
character expected of a modern clergyman.
Sometimes the mere fact of changing from a poetic to a political
context produces the satire or humour. What is praiseworthy in a
poet--the ability to mingle fact and fiction skillfully (151)--becomes
highly ironic when applied to a politician who
In Falsehood Probability imploys,
Nor his old Lies with newer Lies destroys. (p. 16)
Horace's "ut pictura poesis" (361) produces this bland but destructive
couplet:
Not unlike Paintings, Principles appear,
Some best at distance, some when we are near. (p. 36)
More humourous than satirical is the relation between Horace's
declaration that there's no place for a mediocre poet (372-73) and
Bramston's
The Middle way the best we sometimes call.
But 'tis in Politicks no way at all.
There is no Medium: for the term in vogue
On either side is, Honest Man, or Rogue. (pp. 37-38)
The conclusion of the poem involves a somewhat more complex
transformation. Horace closes with a humourously self-deprecating
description of the "poetic itch": the afflicted poet stumbles into
ditches as he babbles his verses aloud; people flee from him, and with
good reason; if he catches anyone, he hangs on like a leech and reads
his victim to death. Bramston describes another "sort of itch,"
parliamenteering. Sir Harry Clodpole knows better than to make speeches
to the electors; he solicits their votes by feasting them, and they run
_towards_ him (or his table), not away. They, not he, are the leeches;
"they never leave him while he's worth a groat" (p. 45).
Bramston--it seems an excessive refinement to speak of a persona or
narrator--presents himself as a rather simple, naive political observer
who yearns for clear-cut distinctions between parties; he wants to know
where politicians stand on issues. The confusion, the blurring of old
party lines, in present-day England is like the monster in the
frontispiece. Though simple, he is also well informed. He seems to have
a good knowledge of British history since the Restoration, referring
casually to the Exclusion Crisis of 1680-81 (p. 15), the Kentish
Petition of 1701 (p. 10), and the South Sea Bubble of 1720 (p. 7). All
these past events are used to reinforce present lessons. He is
up-to-date, as shown by his reference to the recent events in the
careers of Methuen and Woolston. He professes familiarity with the
characters of the leading politicians and also knows something about
what is going on in the constituencies. He knows, or claims to know,
how different kinds of listeners will react to different kinds of
speeches.
For a son of Christ Church, one of the most Tory Colleges of Tory
Oxford, he seems remarkably non-partisan, though his Opposition biases
do show through. When he says that "Addison's immortal Page" shows us
how "to screen good Ministers from Publick rage" (p. 9), he is clearly
aiming at Walpole, known as the "Screenmaster General" since his
success in shielding many of the perpetrators of the South Sea Bubble
in 1720. (I have not been able to discover the passage of Addison that
Bramston had in mind.) When the aspiring orator is urged not to "join
with silver Tongue a brazen Face" (p. 24), Walpole is again present by
innuendo, for "brazen-face" was another of his nicknames. On the other
hand, Bramston also makes fun of the "everlasting Fame" that results
from quibbling on Sir Robert's name (p. 6). Bramston perhaps has it
both ways here; while ridiculing commonplace puns, he also invites us
to remember that "Robin" does indeed sound very much like "robbing."
Sometimes he is more subtle and ironic. This subtlety caused difficulty
for at least one contemporary reader, and may do the same for us.
Consider the following passage, which parallels Horace's advice always
to show Achilles wrathful, Orestes mourning, and the like:
To _Likelihood_ your _Characters_ confine;
Don't turn _Sir Paul_ out, let _Sir Paul_ resign.
In _Walpole_'s Voice (if Factions Ill intend)
Give the two _Universities_ a Friend;
Give _Maidston_ Wit, and Elegance refin'd;
To both the _Pelhams_ give the _Scipios_ Mind;
To _Cart'ret_, Learning, Eloquence, and Parts;
To _George_ the _Second_, give all _English_ Hearts. (p. 13)
One of Bramston's early readers found his poem very faulty, and many of
his complaints were directed against the passage just quoted.
Such artless art did ever mortal see,
Or politicks so void of policy?
What bard but this could Pelham's train compare
To Roman Scipio's thunder-bolts of war?
Did e'er their wars enrich their native isle,
With foreign treasures and with Spanish spoil?
But hark! and stare with all your ears and eyes!
Walpole is friend to Universities!
Hail politician bard! we ask not whether
A whig or tory; thou art both and neither.
Poultney and Walpole each adorn thy lays,
Which one for love, and one for money praise.
Alike are mention'd, equally are sung
Will. Shippen staunch, and slight Sir Wm. Young.
Bromley and Wyndham share the motley strain,
This critic finds two main faults in the poem: misinformation and
confusion about particular individuals and, more generally, an
inability to distinguish Whigs from Tories and give each their due.
This last complaint of course mocks Bramston's lament at the beginning
of the poem about the current lack of distinction between parties.
To what extent is this critique justified? What is Bramston trying to
do in this passage? There is no problem with the second line: Sir Paul
Methuen did indeed resign his office, and one gets the impression from
Hervey (pp. 101-2, 250) that he never let anyone forget that he
resigned. Thus we have here the most conventional of truisms. Walpole
is more difficult. He was certainly no friend of the universities,
which were Tory hotbeds. On the other hand, he was reluctant to try to
reduce their privileges or bring them more closely under government
control, for fear of rousing them to keener opposition. Nowhere else
In a certain sense, then, he might be called a friend of the
universities. I have been unable to determine whom Bramston means by
"Maidston"--perhaps one of the Finches, the most prominent family in
the area of Maidstone, Kent. Bramston's critic is certainly right about
the Pelhams: they have nothing whatever in common with the Scipios.
Scipio Africanus Major (236-184/3) was one of the most illustrious
Roman heroes, consul during the Second Punic War and an outstanding
military tactician. Scipio Africanus Minor (c. 185-129) was not only a
consul and a military hero but a great patron of letters whom Cicero
Duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne (1693-1768), Walpole's chief election
manager, was notoriously muddle-headed, nervous, embarrassed, swamped
brother, Henry Pelham (1695?-1754), was much less well known; reserved
and withdrawn, he preferred to work in the background, and his tactical
and organizational abilities were not recognized until considerably
could be less like the Scipios. Most contemporaries agreed with
Bramston's praise of John Carteret, Earl Granville (1690-1763), though
George II, it depends on whose hearts you consult. An anonymous
journalist:
What an Assurance has the Kingdom already given of an
unfeigned Affection to their Majesties Persons and
Government? How do the People shew that none are acceptable
to them, but those that are so to their Majesties? How can
Subjects give stronger Proofs of the high Esteem they have
their Sovereign in, for Penetration and Wisdom, than those
who entirely rely upon the Royal Discerning, and regulate
William Pultney:
The Queen is hated, the King despised, their son both the
one and the other, and such a spirit of disaffection to the
family and general discontent with the present Government is
spread all over the Kingdom, that it is absolutely
impossible for things to go on in the track they are now
By now Bramston's method should be clear: he is praising everyone, but
the praise fits the Opposition (such as Carteret) much better than it
does the Government (the Pelhams). There is perhaps room for doubt
about Walpole and George II, but Bramston's critic's failure to see the
irony in the comparison of Pelhams to Scipios must be the result of
sheer obtuseness. The rationale for Bramston's technique becomes
clearer if we look again at Horace and recall that the basis of his
advice is to follow conventional opinion. The conventional opinions
that Bramston is by implication urging his pupil to follow are those of
the politician's supporters and dependents. It just happens that
Bramston has chosen his examples so that the Opposition conventions are
All this is fun, but it is quite inoffensive. There's no animus, no
vehemence, no bite. Politics do not really engage any of Bramston's
strong convictions. The self-portrait he offers us on pages 29-30 would
be for many political satirists of the period a transparent facade of
mock-innocence, but it seems to fit Bramston very accurately:
Alas Poor Me, you may my fortune guess:
I write, and yet Humanity profess:
I love the King, the Queen, and Royal Race:
I like the Government, but want no Place:
Was never in a Plot, my Brain's not hurt;
I Politicks to Poetry convert.
By contrast to the increasing acrimony of most political satire of the
late 1720's, this attitude is at least refreshing.
Given the topical nature of _The Art of Politicks_, the best use of my
remaining space is probably to annotate the poem. From what I have
learned about its background--and many mysteries remain--I have tried
to choose what seems most relevant. In the interests of saving space,
and since full annotation is not possible anyway, I have kept
documentation to a minimum, especially where the information comes from
easily available sources like the DNB or, conversely, has been pieced
together from several sources. Some works are occasionally referred to
by abbreviation or author's name; the ones not mentioned in the Notes
Cobbett: William Cobbett, _The Parliamentary History of England from
the Earliest Period to the Year 1803_ (London: T. C. Hansard, 1806-20).
Ellis: Jonathan Swift, _A Discourse of the Contests and Dissentions
between the Nobles and Commons in Athens and Rome_, ed. Frank H. Ellis
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1967).
Grey: Anchitel Grey, _Debates of the House of Commons from the Year
Thomas: Peter D. G. Thomas, _The House of Commons in the Eighteenth
Century_ (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971).
Realey: Charles B. Realey, _The Early Opposition to Sir Robert Walpole
P. 1, line 1. Sir James: Sir James Thornhill (c. 1675-1734). As MP for
Weymouth and Melcombe Regis (1722-34) and Serjeant Painter to the King
(1720-32), he embodies the parallel between art and politics that
underlies Bramston's poem. His best-known works were the dome of St.
Paul's and the paintings in Greenwich Hospital. Hogarth married his
daughter in 1729.
P. 2, line 4. Cf. Hervey's comment on Edmund Gibson, Bishop of London,
who "affected to conciliate in himself both characters of Whig and
Tory, declaring himself always a Whig in the State and a Tory in the
Church" (pp. 90-91). Gibson's attitude can be traced back at least as
far as Swift's _Sentiments of a Church of England Man_ (1711).
line 11. Patriots: the self-awarded designation of the major
group of Walpole's opponents.
P. 3, line 6. Parliament devoted considerable time to fixing turnpike
tolls.
Fleury: Andre Hercule de (1653-1743). Created a cardinal in 1726, he
was chief adviser to Louis XV of France from that date till his death,
and therefore a person of great interest to England. His guiding
principle was to keep France at peace with the rest of Europe.
P. 4, lines 2-3. "Tory" originally meant an Irish outlaw, and "Whig" a
Scottish rebel. For other theories of the origin of "Whig" that were
current in 1729, see OED.
line 12. Repetition Day: a day on which schoolboys recite
memorized lessons.
P. 5, line 7. The human face in Bramston's frontispiece has been said
to resemble Heidegger, but it does not seem to match his reputation for
extreme ugliness. See _TE_, 5, 92, 290, 443-44.
P. 6, lines 3-4. Ridpath: George Ridpath (d. 1726), Whig journalist.
Abel Roper (1665-1726), publisher of the _Tory Post Boy_.
P. 7, line 10. Pinkethman: William Pinkethman (or Penkethman) (d.
seconds. See TE, 4, 220, 377.
line 12. Maypole: This remarkable barometer of intellectual
history was razed by the Puritan parliament in 1644. A new one, 134
feet tall, was set up at the Restoration; it, or a successor, had
decayed to a height of twenty feet in 1717 when Sir Isaac Newton
acquired it and presented it to James Pound to use as a telescope
mount.
P. 8, line 2. Newer Square: Cavendish Square, according to Horace
Walpole's annotation.
line 6. The bridge at Putney Ferry was completed in 1729.
P. 9, lines 4-5. Thomas Tickell's poetical _Epistle from a Lady in
England to a Gentleman at Avignon_ went through five editions in 1717.
lines 6-7. "Caleb D'Anvers" was the pseudonym under which
appeared _The Craftsman_, the opposition journal directed by
Bolingbroke and Pultney. Bramston's expression of ignorance must
be ironic.
P. 10, lines 1-2. Arthur Onslow, who became Speaker in 1728, insisted
that all members bow to the Speaker's Chair when entering or leaving
the House (Thomas, p. 356).
line 12. The "Kentish Petition" was presented to the
Tory-controlled Parliament on 8 May 1701 by five gentlemen of Kent.
It urged Parliament to grant speedily to King William the subsidies
that would enable him to pursue his European wars against Louis XIV.
Parliament did not consider its words soft; it voted the petition
seditious, scandalous, and insolent, and arrested the five gentlemen,
who thereupon became popular heroes, at least among the Whigs. See
Defoe's _History of the Kentish Petition_ (1701) and Ellis,
pp. 53-56, 65-66.
P. 11, lines 3-8. Pultney: William Pultney (1684-1764), later Earl of
Bath. The leader of the "Patriot" opposition to Walpole in the House of
Commons. Hervey reluctantly concedes that his abilities were
outstanding (pp. 790-91).
P. 12, line 4. the Rod: that is, the rod of the Serjeant-at-Arms, the
officer responsible for keeping order in the House of Commons.
line 6. the Bar: The Bar marked the outer limit of the House,
and, as the lines imply, was where offenders stood to be reprimanded.
lines 11-12. The "one cause" is presumably Walpole's patronage.
The Cornish constituencies were notoriously corrupt even by
eighteenth-century standards, and Walpole cultivated the Scots
assiduously. A Scottish "laird" is a landowner, not a "lord" in the
English sense.
P. 13, line 12. Flying-Squadron: apparently a group which claimed to
vote by principle rather than from attachment to any party. Sir Joseph
Jekyll was considered its leader. See Sedgwick, _House of Commons_, 2,
"Squadronist."
P. 15, lines 2ff. The famous speech of Colonel Silius Titus (7 Jan.
whether to keep the lion out or to let him in and chain him. Bramston
may have been following an independent tradition or merely exercising
poetic license. The lion is, of course, James, Duke of York, the Roman
Catholic heir to the throne.
Lane: Sir Richard Lane (c. 1667-1756), MP for Worcester 1727-34. He was
a merchant, sugar baker, and salt trader, and a consistent supporter of
the administration. For examples of his indecorous use of biblical
allusions see Sedgwick, 2, 197-98 (the "bantering speech" mentioned
there used the Book of Revelation to prove that merchants were the best
people on earth); and Knatchbull, p. 137.
P. 16, line 5. Rufus: King William II, son of William the Conqueror,
known as William Rufus, was often evoked as an example of tyranny, as
in Pope's _Windsor-Forest_.
P. 17, lines 9-10. Prince William: younger son of George II, eight
years old in 1729; Louisa: youngest daughter of King George, then five.
P. 18, line 4. William Shippen (1673-1743) was an extreme Tory, noted
for his outspoken attacks on the Walpole ministry, one of which landed
him in the Tower. Sir William Yonge (c. 1693-1755) was notorious, at
least among the opposition, for voluble but empty speeches in support
of Walpole, "melodious nothings" as one satirist put it. See also
Hervey, p. 36, and TE, 4, 394. The attack on _The Art of Politicks_
quoted above complains that Shippen and Yonge should be mentioned in
the same breath, but Bramston's point obviously is that the young MP
cares nothing for either side.
P. 20, line 8. Polly Peachum is of course the heroine of Gay's
_Beggar's Opera_. The role was played by Lavinia Fenton, who
immediately became the toast of London. "Old Sir John" may be Sir John
Hobart (1693-1756), although he was only fifteen years older than Miss
Fenton (see Sedgwick, 2, 142). His name was sometimes spelled
"Hubbard," and the following stanza appears in "A New Ballad Inscrib'd
to Polly Peachum" (British Library C-116.i.4 #38), the cavalier
typography of which perhaps indicates hasty composition:
Then came Sir J---- H----
Thundring at thy Cubboard:
But you cast them like a Lubboard
And did soon dispatch him.
Whoever he was, Sir John lost out to Charles Paulet, third Duke of
Bolton, who kept Miss Fenton faithfully as his mistress, had three
children by her, and married her on the death of his wife in 1751.
P. 21, line 10. The House of Commons had used St. Stephen's Chapel as
its meeting place since the mid-sixteenth century. Dover-Court is "a
proverbial term for a company, in which all are speakers and none
hearers" (Bell).
P. 23, line 2. Waits: "a small body of wind instrumentalists maintained
by a city or town at the public charge" (OED).
line 10. To sell bargains is to return indecent answers to
civil questions.
P. 24, line 6. Mother Needham was a prominent bawd, notorious for her
foul language. See TE, 4, 374-75, and 5, 293-94.
lines 7-8. "Oldfieldismus" and "Kibberismus" refer respectively
to the styles of Anne Oldfield, a well-known actress, and Colley Cibber,
playwright, stage manager, and hero of the _Dunciad_. Mrs. Oldfield was
generally respected, but Pope, like Bramston, seems to have disliked
her (TE, 4, 375).
line 11. Tallboy was a booby young lover in Richard Brome's
comedy _The Jovial Crew_ (1641), popular throughout the eighteenth
century.
P. 26, line 12. Mist: Nathaniel Mist, Tory journalist. See TE, 5, 448.
Eusden: Laurence Eusden, Poet Laureate 1718-30, often ridiculed by
Pope.
line 14. Cibber's opera is _Love in a Riddle_ (1729), designed
to capitalize on the craze for ballad opera created by _The Beggar's
Opera_.
P. 27, line 5. Censor: Sir Richard Steele as Isaac Bickerstaffe, the
nominal author of _The Tatler_.
P. 29, line 6. Where Edmund Curll stood was in the pillory.
P. 31, line 3. Hugo Grotius's classic of political science, _De jure
belli ac pacis_, was published in 1625 and translated in 1654.
P. 32, line 1. Wickfort: Abraham de Wicquefort, _l'Ambassadeur et ses
fonctions_ (La Haye, 1680). It was summarized in _The Craftsman_ of 23
Sept. 1727.
line 4. John Banks was the author of _The Unhappy Favourite; or
the Earl of Essex_ (1681) and of _The Island Queens, or the Death of
Mary, Queen of Scotland_ (prohibited in 1684; a revision was produced
in 1704). Bell says that although "written in the most contemptible
language, yet they never fail to melt the audience into tears, merely
by the force of judicious and well-arranged plots and incidents."
P. 33, line 1. Arch-Bishop: William Wake, Archbishop of Canterbury
since 1716. He was 72 in 1729. Master of the Rolls: Sir Joseph Jekyll,
who had held the office since 1717, was about 66 in 1729.
line 12. Spence: Thomas Spence (d. 1737), Serjeant-at-Arms.
P. 34, line 3. Toft: In 1726 one Mary Toft claimed to have given birth
to seventeen live rabbits, and some who should have known better
believed her. See Pope's poem on her, _TE_, 6, 259, and Hogarth's
engraving.
throws: i.e., throes, labor pains.
line 8: Bromley and Hanmer: William Bromley (?1663-1732),
MP for Oxford 1701-32, Speaker 1710-13; Sir Thomas Hanmer (1677-1746),
who represented several constituencies from 1701-27 and was Speaker
refused the places offered them by George I in 1715 (Foord, p. 51).
P. 35, line 1. Tonson: Jacob Tonson, prominent bookseller.
line 9. Cler. Dom. Com.: "Clerk of the House of Commons."
P. 36, line 2. Die Martis is Tuesday; Thursday is Die Jovis.
line 6. Wyndham: Sir William Wyndham, MP for Somerset 1710-40,
prominent opposition leader from the 1720s. See Sedgwick, 2, 562-64,
for his reputation. Hervey believed that his high reputation was partly
due to Walpole's henchmen, who inflated it in order to deflate
Pultney's (p. 21).
P. 44, line 4. Sir Robert Fagg was better known for horse-racing and
wenching than for politics; he appears in Hogarth's painting of _The
Beggar's Opera_ admiring Lavinia Fenton and in the ballad cited in my
note to p. 20, line 8. Running for Parliament in the borough of
Steyning, Sussex, in 1722, he came in third in a five-man race with
nineteen votes. He also ran third in 1727; the vote is not recorded,
unless Bramston's "two Voices" is to be taken literally.
Universite de Montreal
Sherburn (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1956), 3, 173. See also Antony
Coleman's introduction to James Miller's _Harlequin-Horace_ (1731; ARS
Press, 1975), 1, 77. I should also like to thank Mr. Foxon for generous
personal help.
University of North Carolina.
His offending works were six _Discourses on the Miracles of our
Saviour_ (1727-29). He never succeeded in paying his fine of L100
(Pope, _Poems_ (Twickenham Edition, genl. ed. John Butt; London:
Methuen, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1939-69), 5, 459). Hereafter
referred to as _TE_.
Methuen's resignation is erroneously dated in 1730 in _DNB_ and in
Romney Sedgwick, _The House of Commons 1715-1754_ (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1970), 2, 254. See Abel Boyer, _The Political State
of Great Britain, 37_ (May 1729), 523, and John, Lord Hervey. _Some
Materials towards Memoirs of the Reign of King George II_, ed. Romney
Sedgwick (London: Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1931), pp. 101-02. According
to Hervey, Methuen's ostensible reason for resigning was his dislike of
the general conduct of the court, his real reason his failure to be
appointed Secretary of State.
trans. H. Rushton Fairclough (Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University
Press, 1961). Line numbers of the Latin verse are in the text.
Alexander Pope, Esq. Together with Many Original Poems and Letters, of
Contemporary Writers, Never Before Published_ (London, 1776). 1.
printed.
pp. 249-50; Sir Edward Knatchbull, _Parliamentary Diary, 1722-30_, ed.
A. N. Newman (London: Offices of the Royal Historical Society, 1963),
p. 42.
Companion to Classical Literature_.
and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1974), pp. 9-11; Reed
Browning, _The Duke of Newcastle_ (New Haven and London: Yale
University Press, 1975), pp. xi-xiii, 80-88.
Clarendon Press, 1964), pp. 142-45.
strategies, see Maynard Mack, _The Garden and the City: Retirement and
Politics in the Later Poetry of Pope, 1731-1743_ (Toronto and Buffalo:
University of Toronto Press, 1969); Isaac Kramnick, _Bolingbroke and
his Circle: The Politicks of Nostalgia in the Age of Walpole_
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1968); and J.V. Guerinot and
Rodney D. Jilg, eds., _The Beggar's Opera: Contexts_ (Hamden, Conn.:
Archon Books, 1976), esp. pp. 69-95.
Leave Fellowship from the Canada Council, whom I should like to thank
for their support.
Monsieur, Monsieur _Heydegger_, Surintendant des Plaisirs d'
Angleterre.