Editor and Founder of the Book of Knowledge
Editor of Harmsworth's Universal Encyclopaedia
_Table of Contents_
PORTRAIT OF MOLIÈRE                       _Frontispiece_
GOETHE (_Continued_)                                PAGE
(MOLIÈRE: _Continued in Vol. XVIII_)
A Complete Index of THE WORLD'S GREATEST BOOKS will be found at
the end of Volume XX.
_Poetry and Drama_
_(Continued)_
_Persons in the Drama_
ADELBERT VON WEISLINGEN          ELIZABETH, _wife to Goetz_
FRANZ VON SICKINGEN              MARIE, _his sister_
FRANZ, _page to Weislingen_      IMPERIAL COUNCILLOR
GEORGE, _page to Goetz_          USHER
_Leaders of the rebel peasants_
SCENE I.--_Forest; a poor hut in the background_. GOETZ _and_
GOETZ: Where can my men be? Up and down I have to walk, lest sleep
should overcome me. Five days and nights already in ambush. But when
I get thee, Weislingen, I shall make up for it! You priests may send
round your obliging Weislingen to decry me--I am awake. You escaped
me, bishop! So your dear Weislingen may pay the piper. George! George!
(_Enter_ GEORGE.) Tell Hans to get ready. My scouts may be back any
moment. And give me some more wine!
GEORGE: Hark! I hear some horses galloping--two--it must be your
men!
GOETZ: My horse, quick! Tell Hans to arm!
approaching. Exit_ GOETZ _and his men_.
GEORGE: Oh, St. George! Make me strong and brave! And give me spear,
SCENE II.--_Hall at Jaxthausen_. ELIZABETH _and_ MARIE.
MARIE: If I had a husband who always exposed himself to danger, I
should die the first year.
ELIZABETH: Thank God, I am made of harder stuff! God grant that my
boy may take after his father, and not become a treacherous hypocrite,
like Weislingen.
MARIE: You are very bitter against him. Yet report speaks well of
him. Your own husband loved him, when they were pages together to the
margrave.
ELIZABETH: There he returns with his spoil! I must get the meal
ready. Here, take the cellar keys and let them have of the best wine!
They have deserved it.
GOETZ (_taking off his helmet and sword_): Unstrap my cuirass and
give me my doublet! Weislingen, you've given us hard work! Be of good
cheer. Where are your clothes? I could lend you some of mine--a neat,
clean suit, which I wore at the wedding of my gracious lord the Count
Palatine, when your bishop got so vexed with me, because I made him
shake hands with me, unknown, after having taken two of his ships a
fortnight before on the Main.
WEISLINGEN: I beg you to leave me alone.
GOETZ: Why? Pray, be cheerful. You are in my power, and I shall not
abuse it. You know my knight's duty is sacred to me. And now I must go
WEISLINGEN: Oh, that it were all a dream! In Berlichingen's power--and
he, the old true-hearted Goetz! Back again in the hall, where we played
as boys, where I loved him with all my heart! How strangely past and
present seem to intermingle here.
GOETZ: Let us drink, until the meal is ready. Come, you are at home.
It is a long time since we last shared a bottle. (_Raising his goblet_)
A gay heart!
WEISLINGEN: Those times are past.
GOETZ: Heaven forbid! Though merrier days we may not find. If you had
only followed me to Brabant, instead of taking to that miserable life
at court! Are you not as free and nobly born as anyone in Germany?
Independent, subject only to the emperor? And you submit to vassals,
who poison the emperor's ear against me! They want to get rid of me.
And you, Weislingen, are their tool!
WEISLINGEN: Berlichingen!
GOETZ: No more of it! I hate explanations. They only lead to
deceiving one or the other, or both.
Enter_ MARIE.
MARIE (_to_ WEISLINGEN): I come to greet and to invite you in
my sister's name. What is it? Why are you silent both? You are host
and guest. Be guided by a woman's voice.
GOETZ: You remind me of my duty.
WEISLINGEN: Who could resist so heavenly a hint?
MARIE: Draw near each other, be reconciled! (_The men shake hands_.)
The union of brave men is the most ardent wish of all good women.
SCENE I.--_A room at Jaxthausen_. Marie _and_ Weislingen.
MARIE: You say you love me. I willingly believe it, and hope to be
happy with you and to make you happy.
WEISLINGEN: Blessed be your brother and the day he rode out to
GOETZ: Your page is back. Whatever his news, Adelbert, you are
free! All I ask is your word that you will not aid and abet my
enemies.
WEISLINGEN: I take your hand. And may I at the same time take
the hand of this noblest of all women?
GOETZ: May I say "yes" for you, Marie? You need not blush--your
eyes have answered clearly. Well, then, Weislingen, take her hand,
and I say Amen, friend and brother! I must call my wife. Elizabeth!
(_Enter_ ELIZABETH.) Join your hand in theirs and say "God bless
you!" They are a pair. Adelbert is going back to Bamberg to detach
himself openly from the bishop, and then to his estates to settle
his affairs. And now we'll leave him undisturbed to hear his boy's
report.
WEISLINGEN: Such bliss for one so unworthy!
FRANZ: God save you, noble sir! I bring you greetings from
everybody in Bamberg--from the bishop down to the jester. How they
are distressed at your mishap! I am to tell you to be patient--they
will think the more impatiently of your deliverance; for they cannot
spare you.
WEISLINGEN: They will have to. I'll return, but not to stay long.
FRANZ: Not to stay? My lord, if you but knew what I know! If you
had but seen her--the angel in the shape of woman, who makes Bamberg
a forecourt of heaven--Adelheid von Walldorf!
WEISLINGEN: I have heard much of her beauty. Is her husband at
court?
FRANZ: She has been widowed for four months, and is at Bamberg for
amusement. If she looks upon you, it is as though you were basking in
spring sunshine.
WEISLINGEN: Her charms would be lost on me. I am betrothed. Marie
will be the happiness of my life. And now pack up. First to Bamberg,
SCENE II.--_A forest. Some Nuremberg merchants, who, attacked on their
way to the Frankfurt Fair by_ Goetz _and his men, have
escaped, leaving their goods in the hands of the knights.
The page_ George _has, however, recaptured two of the
merchants as_ Goetz _and his men enter_.
GOETZ: Search the forest! Let none escape!
GEORGE (_stepping forward_): I've done some preparatory work. Here
they are.
GOETZ: Welcome, good lad! Keep them well guarded! (_Exit his men
with the merchants_.) And now, what news of Weislingen?
GEORGE: Bad news! He looked confused when I said to him, "A few
words from your Berlichingen." He tried to put me off with empty words,
but when I pressed him he said he was under no obligation to you, and
would have nothing to do with you.
GOETZ: Enough! I shall not forget this infamous treachery. Whoever
gets into my power shall feel it. (_Exit_ GEORGE.) I'll revel in their
agony, deride their fear. And how, Goetz, are you thus changed? Should
other people's faults and vices make you renounce your chivalry, and
abandon yourself to vulgar cruelty? I'll drag him back in chains, if
I can't get him any other way. And there's an end of it, Goetz; think
of your duty!
GEORGE: Now let your joke be ended, they are frightened enough. One
of them, a handsome young man, gave me this casket, and said, "Take
this as ransom! The jewels I meant to take to my betrothed. Take them,
and let me escape."
GOETZ (_examining the jewels_): This time, Marie, I shall not be
tempted to bring it to you as a birthday gift. Even in your misfortune
you would rejoice in the happiness of others. Take it, George. Give
it back to the lad. Let him take it to his bride, with greeting from
Goetz! And let all the prisoners free at sunset.
SCENE I.--_Pleasure-garden at Augsburg. The_ EMPEROR, _the_ BISHOP OF
BAMBERG, WEISLINGEN, _the_ LADY ADELHEID, COURTIERS.
EMPEROR: I am tired of these merchants with their eternal
complaints! Every shopkeeper wants help, and no one will stir against
the common enemy of the empire and of Christianity.
WEISLINGEN: Who would be active abroad while he is threatened at
home?
BISHOP: If we could only remove that proud Sickingen and
Berlichingen, the others would soon fall asunder.
EMPEROR: Brave, noble men at heart, who must be spared and used
against the Turks.
WEISLINGEN: The consequences may be dangerous. Better to capture
them and leave them quietly upon their knightly parole in their
castles.
EMPEROR: If they then abide by the law, they might again be
honourably and usefully employed. I shall open the session of the Diet
to-morrow with this proposal.
WEISLINGEN: A clamour of joyful assent will spare your majesty the
end of the speech.
WEISLINGEN: And so you mean to go--to leave the festive scenes for
which you longed with all your heart, to leave a friend to whom you
are indispensable, to delay our union?
ADELHEID: The gayer, the freer shall I return to you.
WEISLINGEN: Will you be content if we proceed against Berlichingen?
ADELHEID: You deserve a kiss! My uncle, Von Wanzenau, must be
captain!
WEISLINGEN: Impossible! An incompetent old dreamer!
ADELHEID: Let the fiery Werdenhagen, his sister's stepson, go with
him.
WEISLINGEN: He is thoughtless and foolhardy, and will not improve
matters.
ADELHEID: We have to think of our relatives. For love of me, you
must do it! And I want some exemptions for the convent of St. Emmerau;
you can work the chancellor. Then the cup-bearer's post is vacant at
the Hessian Court, and the high stewardship of the Palatinate. I want
them for our friends Braimau and Mirsing.
WEISLINGEN: How shall I remember it all?
ADELHEID: I shall train a starling to repeat the names to you, and
to add, "Please, please." (_Exit_ WEISLINGEN. _To_ FRANZ, _whom she
stops as he crosses to follow his master_): Franz, could you get me
a starling, or would you yourself be my starling? You would learn
more rapidly.
FRANZ: If you would teach me. Try. Take me with you.
ADELHEID: No, you must serve me here. Have you a good memory?
FRANZ: For your words. I remember every syllable you spoke to me
that first day at Bamberg.
ADELHEID: Now, listen, Franz. I shall tell you the names which I
want you to repeat to your master, always adding, "Please, please."
FRANZ (_seizing her hand passionately_): Please, please!
ADELHEID (_stepping back_): Hands are not wanted. You must lose
such bad manners. But you must not be so upset at a little rebuke.
One punishes the children one loves.
FRANZ: You love me, then?
ADELHEID: I might love you as a child, but you are getting too tall
SCENE II.--_Hall at Jaxthausen_. SICKINGEN _and_ GOETZ.
GOETZ: So you want to marry a jilted woman?
SICKINGEN: To be deceived by him is an honour for you both. I want
a mistress for my castles and gardens. In the field, at court, I want
to stand alone.
SELBITZ: Bad news! The emperor has put you under the ban, and has
sent troops to seize you.
GOETZ: Sickingen, you hear. Take back your offer, and leave me!
SICKINGEN: I shall not turn from you in trouble. No better wooing
than in time of war and danger.
GOETZ: On one condition. You must publicly detach yourself from me.
The emperor loves and esteems you, and your intercession may save me
in the hour of need.
SICKINGEN: But I can secretly send you twenty horsemen.
SCENE III.--_A hill with a view over a fertile country_. GEORGE _and_
GOETZ'S _men cross the stage, chasing the imperial troops.
Then_ SELBITZ _is carried on, wounded, accompanied by_
SELBITZ: Let me rest here!--and back to your master; back to Goetz!
FAUD: Let me stay with you. I am no good below; they have hammered
my old bones till I can scarcely move. (_Exit soldiers._) Here from
the wall I can watch the fight.
SELBITZ: What do you see?
FAUD: Your horsemen are turning tail. I can see Goetz's three black
feathers in the midst of the turmoil. Woe, he has fallen! And George's
blue plume has disappeared! Sickingen's horsemen in flight! Ha! I see
Goetz again! And George! Victory! Victory! They are routed! Goetz is
after them--he has seized their flag! The fugitives are coming here!
Oh! what will they do with you?
SELBITZ: Come down and draw! My sword is ready. I'll make it hot for
them, even sitting or lying down!
LERSE _comes to their rescue, attacking the soldiers furiously,
killing some and putting the rest to flight. Enter_ GOETZ, GEORGE,
_a troop of armed men._
SELBITZ: Good luck, Goetz! Victory! Victory! How did you fare?
GOETZ: To George and Lerse I owe my life; I was off my horse when
they came to the rescue. I have their flag and a few prisoners.
SELBITZ: Lerse saved me, too. See what work he has done here!
GOETZ: Good luck, Lerse! And God bless my George's first brave deed!
Now back to the castle, and let us gather our scattered men.
SCENE I.--_Jaxthausen. A small room_. MARIE _and_ SICKINGEN.
SICKINGEN: You may smile, but I felt the desire to possess you when
you first looked upon me with your blue eyes, when you were with your
mother at the Diet of Speier. I have long been separated from you; but
that wish remained, with the memory of that glance.
SICKINGEN: Good luck!
MARIE: Welcome, a thousand times!
GOETZ: Now quickly to the chapel! I've thought it all out, and time
presses.
SCENE II.--_Large hall; in the background a door, leading to the
chapel_. LERSE _and men-at-arms. Enter_ GOETZ _from
chapel_.
GOETZ: How now, Lerse? The men had better be distributed over the
walls. Let them take any breastplates, helmets, and arms they may want.
Are the gates well manned?
LERSE: Yes, sir.
GOETZ: Sickingen will leave us at once. You will lead him through
the lower gate, along the water, and across the ford. Then look around
you, and come back.
_Drums in distance announce the enemy's approach_.
GOETZ: May God bless you and send you merry, happy days!
ELIZABETH: And may He let your children be like you!
SICKINGEN: I thank you, and I thank you, Marie, who will lead me to
happiness.
GOETZ: A pleasant journey! Lerse will show you the way.
MARIE: That is not what we meant. We shall not leave you.
GOETZ: You must, sister! (_To_ SICKINGEN) You understand? Talk to
Marie; she is your wife. Take her to safety, and then think of me.
GEORGE: They approach from all sides. I saw their pikes glitter from
the tower.
GOETZ: Have the gate barricaded with beams and stones.
requesting_ GOETZ _to surrender unconditionally_. GOETZ
_refuses angrily, and slams the window. Enter_ LERSE.
LERSE: There is plenty of powder, but bullets are scarce.
GOETZ: Look round for lead! Meanwhile, we must make the crossbows
crossbow_.
LERSE (_breaking a window and detaching the lead from the glass_):
This lead has rested long enough; now it may fly for a change.
GOETZ: They have ceased firing, and offer a truce with all sorts of
signs and white rags. They will probably ask me to surrender on
knightly parole.
LERSE: I'll go and see. 'Tis best to know their mind.
LERSE: Liberty! Liberty! Here are the conditions. You may withdraw
with arms, horses, and armour, leaving all provisions behind. Your
property will be carefully guarded. I am to remain.
GOETZ: Come, take the best arms with you, and leave the others here!
Come, Elizabeth! Through this very gate I led you as a young bride.
Who knows when we shall return?
_While the men are choosing arms and preparing_,
LERSE, _who has heard shouting and firing without,
looks through the window_.
LERSE: God! They are murdering our master! He is off his horse!
Help him!
FAUD: George is still fighting. Let's go! If they die, I don't want
SCENE III.--_Night; anteroom in_ ADELHEID'S _castle_. WEISLINGEN,
FRANZ, ADELHEID, _with a retinue of masked and costumed
revellers_.
WEISLINGEN: May I, in these moments of lightheartedness, speak to
you of serious matters? Goetz is probably by this time in our hands.
The peasants' revolt is growing in violence; and the League has given
me the command against them. We shall start before long. I shall take
you to my castle in Franconia, where you will be safe, and not too far
from me.
ADELHEID: We shall consider that. I may be useful to you here.
WEISLINGEN: We have not much time, for we break up to-morrow!
ADELHEID (_after a pause_): Very well, then; carnival to-night, and
war to-morrow!
WEISLINGEN: You are fond of change. A pleasant night to you!
ADELHEID: I understand. You would remove me from the court, where
Charles, our emperor's great successor, is the object of all hope? You
will not change my plans. Franz!
FRANZ (_entering_): Gracious lady!
ADELHEID: Watch all the masks, and find out for me the archduke's
disguise! You look sad?
FRANZ: It is your will that I should languish unto death.
ADELHEID _(apart)_: I pity him. (_To_ FRANZ) You are true and
loving; I shall not forget you!
SCENE IV.--_Heilbronn Town Hall_. IMPERIAL COUNCILLOR _and_
COUNCILLOR: You know how you fell into our hands, and are a prisoner
at discretion?
GOETZ: What will you give me to forget it?
COUNCILLOR: You gave your knightly parole to appear and humbly to
await his majesty's pleasure?
GOETZ: Well, here I am, and await it!
COUNCILLOR: His majesty's mercy releases you from the ban and all
punishment, provided you subscribe to all the articles which shall be
read unto you.
GOETZ: I am his majesty's faithful servant. But, before you proceed,
where are my men; what is their fate?
COUNCILLOR: That is no business of yours. Secretary, read the
articles! _(Reads)_: I, Goetz von Berlichingen, having lately risen
in rebellion against the emperor------
GOETZ: 'Tis false! I am no rebel! I refuse to listen any further!
COUNCILLOR: And yet we have strict orders to persuade you by fair
means, or to throw you into prison.
GOETZ: To prison? Me? That cannot be the emperor's order! To promise
me permission to ward myself on parole, and then again to break your
treaty.
COUNCILLOR: We owe no faith to robbers.
GOETZ: If you were not the representative of my respected sovereign,
you should swallow that word, or choke upon it!
citizens with halberds and swords_.
COUNCILLOR: You will not listen--seize him!
a sword from another. They stand aloof_.
GOETZ: Come on! I should like to become acquainted with the bravest
among you.
USHER: Franz von Sickingen is without and sends word that having
heard how faith has been broken with his brother-in-law, he insists
upon justice, or within an hour he will fire the four quarters of the
town, and abandon it to be sacked by his men.
GOETZ: Brave friend!
COUNCILLOR: You had best dissuade your brother-in-law from his
rebellious intention. He will only become the companion of your fall!
Meanwhile, we will consider how we can best uphold the emperor's
authority.
GOETZ: That was help from heaven. I asked nothing but knightly ward
upon my parole.
SICKINGEN: They have shamefully abused the imperial authority. I
know the emperor, and have some influence with him. I shall want your
fist in an enterprise I am preparing. Meanwhile, they will let you and
your men return to your castle upon the promise not to move beyond
its confines. And the emperor will soon call you. Now back to the
wigs! They have had time enough to talk; let's save them the trouble!
SCENE I.--_Forest_. GOETZ _and_ GEORGE.
GOETZ: No further! Another step and I should have broken my oath.
What is that dust beyond? And that wild mob moving towards us?
LERSE (_entering_): The rebel peasants. Back to the castle! They
have dealt horribly with the noblest men!
GOETZ: On my own soil I shall not try to evade the rabble.
STUMPF: We come to ask you, brave Goetz, to be our captain.
GOETZ: What! Me? To break my oath? Stumpf, I thought you were a
friend! Even if I were free, and you wanted to carry on as you did at
Weinsberg, raving and burning, and murdering, I'd rather be killed
than be your captain!
STUMPF: If we had a leader of authority, such things would not
happen. The princes and all Germany would thank you.
SIEVERS: You must be our captain, or you will have to defend your
own skin. We give you two hours to consider it.
GOETZ: Why consider? I can decide now as well as later. Will you
desist from your misdeeds, and act like decent folk who know what
they want? Then I shall help you with your claims, and be your captain
SCENE II.--_Landscape, with village and castle in distance_. GOETZ
_and_ GEORGE.
GEORGE: I beseech you, leave this infamous mob of robbers and
incendiaries.
GOETZ: We have done some good and saved many a convent, many a life.
GEORGE: Oh, sir, I beg you to leave them at once, before they drag
you away with them as prisoner, instead of following you as captain!
(_Flames are seen rising from the distant village_.) See there! A new
crime!
GOETZ: That is Miltenberg. Quick, George! Prevent the burning of the
castle. I'll have nothing further to do with the scoundrels.
GEORGE: I shall save Miltenberg, or you will not see me again.
GOETZ: Everybody blames me for the mischief, and nobody gives me
credit for having prevented so much evil. Would I were thousands of
miles away!
LINK: Rouse yourself, captain; the enemy is near and in great force!
GOETZ: Who burnt Miltenberg?
METZLER: If you want to make a fuss, we'll soon teach you!
his fist_.
KOHL: You are mad! The enemy is coming, and you quarrel.
stage gradually fills with gypsies_. GOETZ _returns
wounded, is recognised by the gypsies, who bandage
him, help him on to his horse, and ask him to lead
them. Soldiers enter and level their halberds at_
SCENE III.--ADELHEID'S _room. Night_. ADELHEID. FRANZ.
FRANZ: Oh, let me stay yet a little while--here, where I live.
Without is death!
ADELHEID: Already you hesitate? Then give me back the phial. You
played the hero, but you are only a boy; A man who wooes a noble woman
stakes his life, honour, virtue, happiness! Boy, leave me!
FRANZ: No, you are mine. And if I get your freedom I get my own.
With a firm hand I shall pour the poison into my master's cup.
Farewell.
SCENE IV.--_Rustic garden_. MARIE _sleeping in an arbour._ LERSE.
LERSE: Gracious lady, awake! We must away. Goetz captured as a rebel
and thrown into a dungeon! His age! His wounds!
MARIE: We must hurry to Weislingen. Only dire necessity can drive
me to this step. Saving my brother's life I go to death. I shall kneel
to him, weep before him.
SCENE V.--WEISLINGEN'S _hall_.
WEISLINGEN: A wretched fever has dried my very marrow. No rest for
me, day or night! Goetz haunts my very dreams. He is a prisoner, and
yet I tremble before him. (_Enter_ MARIE.) Oh, heaven! Marie's spirit,
to tell me of her death!
MARIE: Weislingen, I am no spirit. I have come to beg of you my
brother's life.
WEISLINGEN: Marie! You, angel of heaven, bring with you the tortures
of hell. The breath of death is upon me, and you come to throw me into
despair!
MARIE: My brother is ill in prison. His wounds--his age----
WEISLINGEN: Enough. Franz! (_Enter_ FRANZ _in great excitement_.)
The papers there! (FRANZ _hands him a sealed packet_.) Here is your
brother's death-warrant; and thus I tear it. He lives. Do not weep,
Franz; there's hope for the living.
to the window, and throws himself out into the river_.
WEISLINGEN: Woe to me! Poison from my wife! Franz seduced by the
infamous woman! I am dying; and in my agony throb the tortures of hell.
MARIE (_kneeling):_ Merciful God, have pity on him!
SCENE VI.--_A small garden outside the prison_, GOETZ, ELIZABETH,
LERSE, _and prison-keeper_.
GOETZ: Almighty God! How lovely is it beneath Thy heaven! Farewell,
my children! My roots are cut away, my strength totters to the grave.
Let me see George once more, and sun myself in his look. You turn
away and weep? He is dead! Then die, Goetz! How did he die? Alas!
they took him among the incendiaries, and he has been executed?
ELIZABETH: No, he was slain at Miltenberg, fighting like a lion.
GOETZ: God be praised! Now release my soul! My poor wife! I leave
you in a wicked world. Lerse, forsake her not! Blessings upon Marie
and her husband. Selbitz is dead, and the good emperor, and my George.
Give me some water! Heavenly air! Freedom!
ELIZABETH: Freedom is only above--with thee; the world is a prison.
LERSE: Noble man! Woe to this age that rejected thee! Woe to the
future that shall misjudge thee!
the life of a German soldier of fortune who flourished between 1480
and 1562. The possibilities of his biography inspired Goethe (Vol.
IV, p. 253) with the idea of doing for Germany what Shakespeare had
done for mediæval England. In a few weeks he had turned the life into
a series of vivid dramatic pictures, which so engrossed him that he
"forgot Homer, Shakespeare, and everything." For the next two years
the manuscript lay untouched. In 1773 he made a careful revision and
published it anonymously under the title of "Goetz von Berlichingen of
the Iron Hand"; it is in this form we possess the work now. At a still
later period, in 1804, Goethe prepared another version of the play
for the stage. The subject-matter of "Goetz" is purely revolutionary.
Goetz, the hero himself, is a champion of a good cause--the cause
of freedom and self-reliance. He is the embodiment of sturdy German
virtues, the Empire and the Church playing the unenviable role of
intrigue and oppression. As a stage play, "Goetz" is ill-constructed,
but otherwise it stands a veritable literary triumph, and a worthy
predecessor to "Faust." This epitome has been prepared from the German
text.
_Persons in the Drama_
THOAS, _King of Tauris_
_The scene throughout is laid in a grove before_ DIANA'S _temple in
Tauris_.
IPHIGENIA _and_ THOAS.
THOAS: To-day I come within this sacred fane,
Which I have often entered to implore
And thank the gods for conquest. In my breast
I bear an old and fondly-cherish'd wish,
To which methinks thou canst not be a stranger:
I hope, a blessing to myself and realm,
To lead thee to my dwelling as my bride.
IPHIGENIA: Too great thine offer, king, to one unknown,
Who on this shore sought only what thou gavest,
Safety and peace.
THOAS:          Thus still to shroud thyself
From me, as from the lowest, in the veil
Of mystery which wrapp'd thy coming here,
Would in no country be deem'd just or right.
IPHIGENIA: If I conceal'd, O king, my name, my race,
It was embarrassment, and not mistrust.
For didst thou know who stands before thee now,
Strange horror would possess thy mighty heart,
And, far from wishing me to share thy throne,
Thou wouldst more likely banish me forthwith.
THOAS: Whate'er respecting thee the gods decree,
Since thou hast dwelt amongst us, and enjoy'd
The privilege the pious stranger claims,
To me hath fail'd no blessing sent from heaven.
End then thy silence, priestess!
IPHIGENIA: I issue from the Titan's race.
THOAS: From that same Tantalus, whom Jove himself
Drew to his council and his social board?
IPHIGENIA: His crime was human, and their doom severe;
Alas, and his whole race must bear their hate.
His son, Pelops, obtained his second wife
Through treachery and murder. And Hebe's sons,
Thyestes and Atreus, envious of the love
That Pelops bore his first-born, murdered him.
The mother, held as murderess by the sire,
In terror did destroy herself. The sons,
After the death of Pelops, shared the rule
O'er Mycenæ, till Atreus from the realm
Thyestes drove. Oh, spare me to relate
The deeds of horror, vengeance, cruel infamy
That ended in a feast where Atreus made
His brother eat the flesh of his own boys.
THOAS: But tell me by what miracle thou sprangest
From race so savage.
IPHIGENIA:          Atreus' eldest son
Was Agamemnon; he, O king, my sire;
My mother Clytemnestra, who then bore
To him Electra, and to fill his cup
Of bliss, Orestes. But misfortunes new
Befel our ancient house, when to avenge
The fairest woman's wrongs the kings of Greece
Round Ilion's walls encamp'd, led by my sire.
In Aulis vainly for a favouring gale
They waited; for, enrag'd against their chief,
Diana stay'd their progress, and requir'd,
Through Chalcas' voice, the monarch's eldest daughter.
They lured me to the altar, and this head
There to the goddess doomed. She was appeased,
And shrouded me in a protecting cloud.
Here I awakened from the dream of death,
Diana's priestess, I who speak with thee.
THOAS: I yield no higher honour or regard
To the king's daughter than the maid unknown;
Once more my first proposal I repeat.
IPHIGENIA: Hath not the goddess who protected me
Alone a right to my devoted head?
THOAS: Not many words are needed to refuse,
The _no_ alone is heard by the refused.
IPHIGENIA: I have to thee my inmost heart reveal'd.
My father, mother, and my long-lost home
With yearning soul I pine to see.
THOAS:                            Then go!
And to the voice of reason close thine ear.
Hear then my last resolve. Be priestess still
Of the great goddess who selected thee.
From olden time no stranger near'd our shore
But fell a victim at her sacred shrine;
But thou, with kind affection didst enthral
Me so that wholly I forgot my duty;
And I did not hear my people's murmurs.
Now they cry aloud. No longer now
Will I oppose the wishes of the crowd.
Two strangers, whom in caverns of the shore
We found conceal'd, and whose arrival here
Bodes to my realm no good, are in my power.
With them thy goddess may once more resume
Her ancient, pious, long-suspended rites!
I send them here--thy duty not unknown.
IPHIGENIA: O goddess! Keep my hands from blood!
ORESTES _and_ PYLADES.
ORESTES: When I implor'd Apollo to remove
The grisly band of Furies from my side,
He promised aid and safety in the fane
Of his lov'd sister, who o'er Tauris rules.
Thus the prophetic word fulfils itself,
That with my life shall terminate my woe.
Thee only, friend, thee am I loath to take,
The guiltless partner of my crime and curse,
To yonder cheerless shore!
PYLADES:                   Think not of death!
But mark if not the gods perchance present
Means and fit moment for a joyful flight.
The gods avenge not on the son the deeds
Done by their father.
ORESTES:               It is their decree
Which doth destroy us.
PYLADES:               From our guards I learn
A strange and god-like woman holds in check
The execution of the bloody law.
ORESTES: The monarch's savage will decrees our death;
A woman cannot save when he condemns.
PYLADES: She comes: leave us alone. I dare not tell
At once our names, nor unreserv'd confide
Our fortunes to her. Now retire awhile.
IPHIGENIA: Whence art thou? Stranger, speak! To me thy bearing
Stamps thee of Grecian, not of Scythian race.
The gods avert the doom that threatens you!
PYLADES: Delicious music! Dearly welcome tones
Of our own language in a foreign land!
We are from Crete, Adrastus' sons; and I
Am Cephalus; my eldest brother, he,
Laodamas. Between us stood a youth
Whom, when our sire died (having return'd
From Troy, enrich'd with loot), in contest fierce
My brother slew! 'Tis thus the Furies now
For kindred-murder dog his restless steps.
But to this savage shore the Delphian god
Hath sent us, cheer'd by hope. My tale is told.
IPHIGENIA: Troy fallen! Dear stranger, oh, say!
PYLADES: The stately town
Now lies in ruins. Many a hero's grave
Will oft our thoughts recall to Ilion's shore.
There lies Achilles and his noble friend;
Nor Palamedes, nor Ajax, e'er again
The daylight of their native land beheld.
Yet happy are the thousands who receiv'd
Their bitter death-blow from a hostile hand,
And not like Agamemnon, who, ensnared,
Fell murdered on the day of his return
By Clytemnestra, with Ægisthus' aid.
IPHIGENIA: Base passion prompted then this deed of
shame?
PYLADES: And feelings, cherish'd long of deep revenge.
For such a dreadful deed, that if on earth
Aught could exculpate murder, it were this.
The monarch, for the welfare of the Greeks,
Her eldest daughter doomed. Within her heart
This planted such abhorrence that forthwith
She to Ægisthus hath resigned herself,
And round her husband flung the web of death.
IPHIGENIA (_veiling herself_): It is enough! Thou wilt again
behold me.
IPHIGENIA _and_ ORESTES.
IPHIGENIA: Unhappy man, I only loose thy bonds
In token of a still severer doom.
For the incensed king, should I refuse
Compliance with the rites himself enjoin'd,
Will choose another virgin from my train
As my successor. Then, alas! with nought,
pave ardent wishes, can I succour you.
But tell me now, when Agamemnon fell,
Orestes--did he share his sire's fate?
Say, was he saved? And is he still alive?
And lives Electra, too?
ORESTES: They both survive.
Half of the horror only hast thou heard.
Electra, on the day when fell her sire,
Her brother from impending doom conceal'd;
Him Strophius, his father's relative,
Received with kindest care, and rear'd him up,
With his own son, named Pylades, who soon
Around the stranger twin'd love's fairest bonds.
The longing to revenge the monarch's death
Took them to Mycenæ, and by her son
Was Clytemnestra slain.
IPHIGENIA: Immortal powers!
O tell me of the poor unfortunate!
Speak of Orestes!
ORESTES: Him the Furies chase.
They glare around him with their hollow eyes,
Like greedy eagles. In their murky dens
They stir themselves, and from the corners creep
Their comrades, dire remorse and pallid fear;
Before them fumes a mist of Acheron.
I am Orestes! and this guilty head
Is stooping to the tomb and covets death;
It will be welcome now in any shape.
ORESTES _returns_.
ORESTES: Who art thou, that thy voice thus horribly
Can harrow up my bosom's inmost depths?
IPHIGENIA: Thine inmost heart reveals it. I am she--Iphigenia!
ORESTES: Hence, away, begone!
Leave me! Like Heracles, a death of shame,
Unworthy wretch, locked in myself, I'll die!
IPHIGENIA: Thou shalt not perish! Would that I might hear
One quiet word from thee! Dispel my doubts,
Make sure the bliss I have implored so long.
Orestes! O my brother!
ORESTES: There's pity in thy look! oh, gaze not so--
'Twas with such looks that Clytemnestra sought
An entrance to her son Orestes' heart,
And yet his uprais'd arm her bosom pierced.
The weapon raise, spare not, this bosom rend,
And make an outlet for its boiling streams.
PYLADES: Dost thou not know me, and this sacred grove,
And this blest light, which shines not on the dead?
Attend! Each moment is of priceless worth,
And our return hangs on a slender thread.
The favouring gale, which swells our parting sail,
Must to Olympus waft our perfect joy.
Quick counsel and resolve the time demands.
IPHIGENIA _alone_.
IPHIGENIA: They hasten to the sea, where in a bay
Their comrades in the vessel lie concealed,
Waiting a signal. Me they have supplied
With artful answers should the monarch send
To urge the sacrifice. Detested falsehood!
ARKAS: Priestess, with speed conclude the sacrifice!
Impatiently the king and people wait.
IPHIGENIA: The gods have not decreed that it should be.
The elder of these men of kindred-murder
Bears guilt. The dread Erinnys here within
Have seized upon their prey, polluting thus
The sanctuary. I hasten now to bathe
The goddess' image in the sea, and there
With solemn rites its purity restore.
ARKAS: This hindrance to the monarch I'll announce.
PYLADES: Thy brother is restor'd! The fire of youth
With growing glory shines upon his brow.
Let us then hasten; guide me to the fane.
I can unaided on my shoulder bear
The goddess' image; how I long to feel
The precious burden! Hast thou to the king
Announced the prudent message as agreed?
IPHIGENIA: The royal messenger arrived, and I,
According to thy counsel, fram'd my speech.
PYLADES: Danger again doth hover o'er our heads.
Alas! Why hast thou failed to shroud thyself
Within the veil of sacerdotal rights?
IPHIGENIA: I never have employed them as a veil.
PYLADES: Pure soul! Thy scruples will alike destroy
Thyself and us. Come, let us be firm.
Nor with incautious haste betray ourselves.
IPHIGENIA: It is an honest scruple, which forbids
That I should cunningly deceive the king,
And plunder him who was my second father.
PYLADES: Him dost thou fly, who would have slain thy brother.
If we should perish, bitter self-reproach,
Forerunner of despair, will be thy portion;
IPHIGENIA: I must obey him, for I see my friends
Beset with peril. Yet my own sad fate
Doth with increasing anguish move my heart
To steal the image, sacred and rever'd,
Confided to my care, and him deceive
To whom I owe my life and destiny!
Let not abhorrence spring within my heart!
THOAS _alone_.
THOAS: Fierce anger rages in my riven breast,
First against her whom I esteem'd so pure;
Then 'gainst myself, whose foolish lenity
Hath fashion'd her for treason. Vain my hope
To bind her to me. Now that I oppose
Her wish, she seeks to gain her ends by fraud.
Wherefore delay the sacrifice; inform me!
IPHIGENIA: The goddess for reflection grants thee time.
THOAS: To thee this time seems also opportune.
IPHIGENIA: Are we not bound to render the distress'd
The gracious kindness from the gods received?
Thou know'st we are, and yet wilt thou compel me?
THOAS: Obey thine office, not the king.
IPHIGENIA: Oh, couldst thou see the struggle of my soul,
Courageously toward the first attack
Of an unhappy doom which threatens me;
Must I implore a miracle from heaven?
THOAS: Extravagant thy interest in the fate
Of these two strangers. Tell me who they are.
IPHIGENIA: They are--they seem, at least--I think them Greeks.
THOAS: Thy countrymen; no doubt they have renewed
The pleasing picture of return.
IPHIGENIA (_after a pause_): Attend,
O king, and honour truth in me. A plot
Deceitfully and secretly is laid
Touching the captives thou dost ask in vain.
They have escaped. The eldest is Orestes,
Whom madness seized, my brother; Pylades,
His early friend and confidant, the other.
From Delphi, Phoebus sent them to this shore,
To steal away the image of Diana,
And to him bear back the sister thither.
And for this, deliverance promised he
The Fury-haunted son.
THOAS: The traitors have contrived a cunning web,
And cast it round thee, who, secluded long,
Giv'st willing credence to thine own desire.
IPHIGENIA: No, no! I'd pledge my life these men are true;
And shouldst thou find them otherwise, O king,
Then let them perish both, and cast me forth.
ORESTES (_addressing his followers_): Redouble your
exertions! Hold them back!
And keep a passage open to the ship!
(_To_ IPHIGENIA) We are betray'd; brief time remains
THOAS: None in my presence with impunity
His naked weapon wears!
IPHIGENIA: Do not profane
Diana's sanctuary with rage and blood.
In him revere the king, my second father!
ORESTES: Will he permit our peaceable return?
IPHIGENIA: Thy gleaming sword forbids me to reply.
_with drawn swords_
PYLADES: Do not delay, our friends are putting forth
Their final strength!
ARKAS: They yield; their ship is ours!
THOAS: Let none annoy the foe while we confer.
THOAS: Now, answer me; how dost thou prove thyself
The priestess' brother, Agamemnon's son?
IPHIGENIA: See here, the mark on his right hand impress'd
As of three stars, which on his natal day
Were by the priest declar'd to indicate
Some dreadful deed therewith to be perform'd!
THOAS: E'en though thy words had banish'd every doubt,
Still must our arms decide. I see no peace;
Their purpose, as thou didst thyself confess,
Was to deprive me of Diana's image!
ORESTES: The image shall not be the cause of strife!
We now perceive the error which the god
Threw o'er our minds. His counsel I implor'd;
He answer'd, "Back to Greece the sister bring,
Who in the Tauris sanctuary abides."
To Phoebus' sister we applied the words,
And she referred to thee.
IPHIGENIA: Oh, let thy heart
Be moved by what an honest tongue has spoken.
Look on us, king; an opportunity
For such a noble deed not oft occurs!
THOAS: Then go!
IPHIGENIA: Not so, my king! I cannot part
Without thy blessing, or in anger from thee.
THOAS (_extending his hand_): Fare thee well!
Tauris," was first written in prose, and recast into verse in 1786.
Inspired partly by his feelings towards Frau von Stein, whom Goethe
"credited with knowing every trait of his being," and partly by the
"Iphigenia in Tauris" of Euripides, the play is totally different from
anything that had as yet come from his pen. Although it lacks some of
the pomp and circumstance of the best Greek tragedy, it is written with
great dignity in the strictest classical form, admirably suggesting
the best in French classical drama. The prominent motive of the piece
is the struggle between truth and falsehood. "It is," one critic has
remarked, "a poetic drama of the soul." On its production at Weimar,
the German public received it indifferently.
The Inspector-General
_Persons in the Play_
ANTON ANTONOVITCH, _governor of a small town_
ANNA ANDREYEVNA, _his wife_
MARYA, _their daughter_
LUKA, _director of schools_
KHELSTAKOV, _a St. Petersburg official_
OSIP, _his servant-man_
BOBCHINSKI _and_ DOBCHINSKI, _independent gentlemen_
POLICE SUPERINTENDENT and CONSTABLES
SCENE.--_A room in the_ GOVERNOR'S _house. The_ GOVERNOR, _a coarse
and ill-educated official, and several functionaries of the
town_.
GOVERNOR (_addressing the functionaries_): I have bad news. An
inspector-general is coming from St. Petersburg. You must see that
your various departments are set in order. The hospital must be tidied
up and the patients must be provided with nice white night-caps. The
school-teachers must coach up the scholars in their subjects.
BOBCHINSKI: What an extraordinary incident!
DOBCHINSKI: A startling announcement!
ALL: What is it? What is it?
BOBCHINSKI: I will tell you correctly. After you had received the
letter from St. Petersburg, I ran out to tell the postmaster what it
had announced. On the way Dobchinski pressed me to go into the inn
for refreshment. Into the restaurant came an elegant young man with a
fashionable aspect. The landlord told us he was an official on his way
from Petersburg to Saratov, and that he is acting strangely, for he has
been here more than a fortnight, and pays for nothing.
GOVERNOR: Good lord! Surely it cannot be he! Been here a fortnight?
May heaven help us. You, sirs, get all your departments in proper trim.
In the meantime I will take a stroll round the town, and satisfy myself
that travellers are treated with due respect.
The governor orders the police to see that the street leading to the
inn is well swept. He threatens to punish severely any of the
townspeople who shall dare to bring complaints of any kind to the
visiting official.
SCENE.--_A small room in the inn_. OSIP _lying on his master's bed_.
OSIP: Devil take it! I am famishing. It is two months since we left
St. Petersburg. This master of mine has squandered all his money on the
way, and here we are penniless. The old man sends his son money, but
he goes on the racket with it till all is spent, and then he has to
pawn his clothes almost to the last rag. And now this landlord declares
he will let us have nothing more to eat unless we pay in advance. Ah,
there's the knock.
KHELSTAKOV: Go down and ask for something to eat.
OSIP: No. The landlord will not let us have it. He says we are
swindlers, and he threatens to have you put in prison.
KHELSTAKOV: Go to the devil! Call the landlord. (OSIP _goes_.) How
fearfully hungry I am. And I was cheated at cards and cleaned right out
at Penza by that infantry captain. What a miserable little town this
is. They give no credit at the provision shops.
WAITER: The landlord asks what you want.
KHELSTAKOV: Please bring my dinner at once. I must be busy directly
I have dined.
The waiter replies that the landlord refuses to supply anything more,
and seems likely to complain to the governor. But presently dinner is
brought in. To Khlestakov's great consternation Osip announces that
the governor has come and is asking for him.
KHELSTAKOV: What? The landlord has reported me! I'll put on an
aristocratic air, and ask him how he dares----
Governor, entering in trepidation and saluting humbly, astonishes him
by profuse offers of hospitality and entertainment, though when at
first mention is made of taking him to other quarters, the guest in
horror ejaculates that he supposes the gaol is meant, and he asks what
right the governor has to hint at such a thing.
KHELSTAKOV (_indignantly_): How dare you? I--I--I am a government
official at St. Petersburg. I--I--I----
GOVERNOR (_aside_): Good heavens, what a rage he is in! He knows
everything. Those confounded merchants have told him all.
Banging the table, Khlestakov declares he will _not_ go to the
gaol, but will complain to the Minister of the Interior; and the
governor, trembling and terrified, pleads that he has a wife and
little children, and begs that he may not be ruined. The ridiculous
misunderstanding on both sides grows more confused every minute. The
governor pours forth the most abject apologies; declares that if the
people accuse him of oppression and extortion, and even of flogging
women, they are a slandering mob.
KHELSTAKOV: What have I to do with your enemies or the women you have
flogged? Don't attempt to flog me. Now, look here, I will pay this
landlord's account, but just now I have not the money. That is why I am
staying here.
GOVERNOR (_aside_): Sly rogue, trying to mystify me! (_Aloud_) If you
really are short of money, I am ready to serve you at once.
The visitor says that he will in that case borrow 200 roubles, and the
money is readily handed over; in fact, the governor quietly slips in
is simply determined to keep up his _incognito_, resolves to act
accordingly, and to tell falsehoods appropriate for mutual deception.
He invites the guest to visit Various institutions, and a round is
made.
SCENE.--_A room in the_ GOVERNOR'S _house_. GOVERNOR, KHELSTAKOV, _and
other functionaries_.
KHELSTAKOV: Fine establishments! In other towns they showed me
nothing.
GOVERNOR: In other towns I venture to say that the officials
think most about their own profit; here we only aim at winning the
approbation of the government.
KHELSTAKOV: That lunch was very good! The fish was delicious! Where
was it that we lunched? Was it not at the hospital? I saw the beds,
but there were not many patients. Have the sick recovered?
GOVERNOR: Yes. Since I became governor they all get well like flies,
not so much by doctoring as by honesty and regularity. Thank God,
everything goes satisfactorily here! Another governor would undoubtedly
look after his own advantage; but, believe me, when I lie down to
sleep, my prayer is, "O Thou my Lord, may the government perceive my
zeal and be satisfied." So I have an easy conscience.
KHELSTAKOV: Are there any clubs here where a game at cards could be
had?
GOVERNOR: God forbid! Here such a thing as a card-club is never heard
of. I am disgusted at the sight of a card, and never dealt one in my
life. Once to amuse the children I built a house of cards, and had
accursed dreams all night.
LUKA (_aside_): But the villain cheated me yesterday out of a hundred
roubles!
Introduced to the governor's wife and daughter, Khlestakov addresses
them in the manner of a gallant from the metropolis, and chatters
boastfully of his influence, his position, and his connections.
His house is the first in St. Petersburg. Meantime, the various
functionaries meet in the house of the governor to concert measures
for propitiating this great courtier. They resolve to present him with
a substantial token of regard. With great trepidation they wait on him.
JUDGE (_entering very nervously_): I have the honour to present
myself. I have been judge here since 1816, and have been decorated
with the Vladimir of the Fourth Class.
KHELSTAKOV: What have you there in your hand?
JUDGE (_in bewilderment drops banknotes on the floor_): Nothing.
KHELSTAKOV: How nothing? I see some money has been dropped.
JUDGE (_trembling and aside_): O heaven, I am already before the
tribunal, and they have brought the cart to take me into exile.
Khlestakov picks up the notes, and asks that the money may be lent
him, as he has spent all his cash on the journey. He promises to
return it as soon as he reaches home, but the judge protests that the
honour of lending it is enough, and he begs that there shall be no
injunction against him.
Next to present himself is the postmaster, in full uniform, sword in
hand. After a little conversation with this functionary, Khlestakov
thinks he may just as well borrow of him also, and he forthwith
mentions that a singular thing has happened to him, for he has lost
all his money on the way, and would be glad to be obliged with the
loan of three hundred roubles. It is instantly counted out with
alacrity, and the postmaster hastily retires. Also, in a very nervous
state, Luka, the School Director, the Charity Commissioner, Bobchinski
and Dobchinski, come to pay their homage, and Khlestakov borrows
easily from each in turn.
KHELSTAKOV _(alone):_ There are many officials here; it seems to me,
however, that they take me for a government functionary. What fools! I
must write about it all to Tryapitchkin at Petersburg; he will write
sketches of it in the papers. Here, Osip, bring me paper and ink! I
will just see how much money I have got. Oh, more than a thousand!
While he is writing a letter Osip interrupts him with earnest
assurances that it will be prudent to depart speedily from the town;
for people have been mistaking him for somebody else, and awkward
complications may ensue. It is really time to go. There are splendid
horses here, and these can be secured for the journey. Khlestakov
consents, tells Osip to take the letter to the post, and to obtain
good posthorses. Suddenly some merchants present themselves with
petitions, bringing with them gifts of sugar-loaves and wine. They
pour forth bitter complaints against the governor. They accuse him
of constant and outrageous extortion. They beg Khlestakov to secure
his deposition from office. When they offer the sugar-loaves and the
wine, Khlestakov protests that he cannot accept bribes, but if they
would offer him a loan of three hundred roubles that would be another
matter. They do so and go out.
MARYA: Ach!
KHELSTAKOV: Why are you so frightened?
MARYA: No; I am not frightened. I thought mamma might be here. I am
disturbing you in your important business.
KHELSTAKOV: But your eyes are more attractive than important
business.
MARYA: You are talking in St. Petersburg style.
KHELSTAKOV: May I venture to be so happy as to offer you a chair?
But no; you should be offered a throne, not a chair! I offer you my
love, which ever since your first glance----
MARYA: Love! I do not understand love!
He kisses her on the shoulder, and, when she rises angrily to go,
falls on his knees. At that moment her mother enters. With a show of
indignation she orders Marya away.
KHELSTAKOV (_kneeling at her feet_): Madame, you see I burn with
love.
ANNA ANDREYEVNA: But permit me, I do not quite comprehend you. If I
am not mistaken, you were making a proposal to my daughter?
KHELSTAKOV: No; I am in love with you.
ANNA ANDREYEVNA: But I am married!
KHELSTAKOV: That is nothing. Let us flee under the canopy of heaven.
I crave your hand!
Marya enters, and seeing Khlestakov on his knees, shrieks. The mother
scolds her for her bad manners, and declares that he was, after
all, asking for the daughter's hand. Then enters the governor. He
breathlessly begins to bewail the base, lying conduct of the merchants
who have been slandering him, and swears he is innocent of oppressing
anybody.
To his profound amazement, Anna informs her husband that the great man
has honoured them by asking for their daughter's hand. On recovering
from his amazement, he sees the couple kissing, and gives them his
blessing. Osip enters at this juncture to say the horses are ready,
and Khlestakov informs the governor that he is only off to visit for a
day a rich uncle. He will quickly return. He presently rides off after
affectionate farewell expressions on both sides.
SCENE.--_As before. The_ GOVERNOR, ANNA ANDREYEVNA, _and_ MARYA. _A
police-officer enters_.
GOVERNOR (_addressing the policeman_): Ivan Karpovitch, summon the
merchants here, brother. Complaining of me, indeed! Cursed lot of Jews!
Little turtle doves! Ascertain who brought petitions; and take care to
let them know how heaven has honoured the governor. His daughter is
going to marry a man without an equal in the world; who can achieve
everything, everything, everything. Let everybody know! Shout it out to
everybody! Ring the bells! Devil take it; now that at length I triumph,
triumph I will!
The police-officer retires. The governor and Anna indulge in roseate
prospects of their coming prosperity. Of course they will not stay
in these mean surroundings, but will remove to St. Petersburg.
Suddenly the merchants enter. The governor receives them with the
utmost indignation, assails them with a shower of vituperation. They
abjectly entreat pardon. They promise to make amends by sending very
handsome presents, and they are enjoined not to forget to do so. The
wedding gifts are to be worthy of the occasion. The merchants retire
crestfallen, and callers stream in with profuse congratulations. Anna,
with studied haughtiness, makes them fully understand that the family
will now be far above them all. All the people secretly express to
each other their hatred and contempt for the governor and his family.
POSTMASTER (_breathlessly entering with an open letter in his hand_):
An astonishing fact, gentlemen! The official which we took for an
inspector-general is not one! I have discovered this from a letter
which he wrote and which I saw was addressed "Post Office Street."
So, as I said to myself that he had been reporting to the authorities
something he had found wrong in the postal department, I felt a
supernatural impulse constraining me to open the letter.
GOVERNOR: You dared to open the letter of so powerful a personage?
POSTMASTER: That is just the joke; that he is neither powerful nor
a personage. I will read the letter. (_Reads_) "I hasten to inform
you, my dear Tryapitchkin, of my experiences. I was cleared out of
everything on the way by an infantry captain, so that an innkeeper
wanted to put me in prison; when, owing to my Petersburg appearance
and dress, the whole town suddenly took me for the governor-general.
So now I am living with the governor, enjoy myself, and flirt with his
wife and daughter. These people all lend me as much money as ever I
please. The governor is as stupid as a grey gelding. The postmaster is
a tippler. The charity commissioner is a pig in a skull-cap."
GOVERNOR: I am crushed--crushed--completely crushed. Catch him!
POSTMASTER: How can we catch him? I, as if purposely, specially
ordered for him the very best post-carriage and three horses.
GOVERNOR: What an old fool I am! I have been thirty years in the
service; not a tradesman nor contractor could cheat me; rogues upon
rogues have I outwitted; three governors-general have I deceived!
ANNA ANDREYEVNA: But this cannot be, Antosha. He is engaged to
Mashenka.
GOVERNOR (_enraged_): Engaged! Rubbish! Look, look; all the world,
all Christendom, all of you look how the governor is fooled! Fool,
fool; old driveller that I am! (_Shakes his fist at himself_) Ah, you
fat-nose! Taking a rag for a man of rank! And now he is jingling his
bells along the road. Who first said he was an inspector-general?
Answer!
accusing each other. A gendarme enters_.
GENDARME: The inspector-general sent by imperial command has
arrived, and requires you to attend him immediately. He awaits you at
the inn.
remained as if petrified, and the curtain falls_.
prince of Russian humorists, but as the real founder of both the
modern drama and the novel in Russian literature. He was born on
March 31, 1809, in the province of Poltava, in South, or "Little,"
Russia, and died at Moscow on March 3, 1852. His life was replete
with romantic episodes. After a short career on the stage, in St.
Petersburg, followed by the tenure of a minor Government office, he
returned to the South, and at once found his true vocation and achieved
a wide popularity by a collection of stories and sketches of Cossack
life, entitled "Evenings at a Farm House," which appeared in 1830.
Other "Cossack Tales" rapidly followed, including the famous "Taras
Bulba"; in recognition of which, and of his project for writing a
history of Russia in the Middle Ages, he was rewarded with a chair of
history at St. Petersburg. This he held but for a short time, however.
Turning his attention to comedy, Gogol now produced the drama "The
Inspector-General" ("Revizor") in 1836, the play achieving a tremendous
success on the stage in the spring of the same year, whilst in 1842 his
novel entitled "Dead Souls" embodied the fruits of the same idea in
fiction. The play is intended to bring a scathing indictment against
the corruptions and abuses of officialism and administration. The
following epitome has been prepared from the original Russian.
She Stoops to Conquer
_Persons in the Play_
SCENE I.--MR. HARDCASTLE'S _house_. MR. _and_ MRS. HARDCASTLE.
MRS. HARDCASTLE: I vow, Mr. Hardcastle, I hate such old-fashioned
trumpery.
HARDCASTLE: And I love it; old friends, old times, old manners, old
books, old wine, and I believe you'll own I've been pretty fond of an
old wife.
MRS. HARDCASTLE: Oh, you're for ever at your old wife. I'm not so old
as you'd make me. I was twenty when my son Tony was born, and he's not
come to years of discretion yet.
HARDCASTLE: Nor ever will, I dare answer; you've taught him finely.
Alehouse and stable are his only schools.
MRS. HARDCASTLE: Poor boy, anyone can see he's consumptive.
HARDCASTLE: Oh, very consumptive!
HARDCASTLE: Blessings on my pretty innocence! What a quantity of
superfluous silk hast thou got about thee, girl!
KATE: But in the evening I am to wear my housewife's dress to please
you; you know our agreement, sir.
HARDCASTLE: By the bye, I shall have to try your obedience this very
evening. In fact, Kate, I expect the young gentleman I have chosen
to be your husband, this very day; and my old friend his father, Sir
Charles Marlow, soon after him. I shall not control your choice, but I
am told that he is of an excellent understanding.
KATE: Is he?
HARDCASTLE: Very generous.
KATE: I believe I shall like him.
HARDCASTLE: Young and brave.
KATE: I'm sure I shall like him.
HARDCASTLE: And very handsome.
KATE: Say no more; he's mine.
HARDCASTLE: And, to crown all, he's one of the most reserved and
bashful young fellows in the world.
KATE: That word has undone all the rest, still I think I'll have him.
(_Exit_ HARDCASTLE.) Reserved and sheepish. Can't he be cured? (_Enter_
MISS NEVILLE.) I'm glad you came, my dear. I am threatened with a
lover, the son of Sir Charles Marlow.
MISS NEVILLE: The most intimate friend of Mr. Hastings, my admirer;
and such a character. Among ladies of reputation the modestest man
alive, but with others----
MISS HARDCASTLE: And has my mother been courting you for my brother
Tony, as usual? I could almost love him for hating you so.
MISS NEVILLE: It is a good-natured creature at bottom, and I'm sure
SCENE II.--_An alehouse_. TONY LUMPKIN _carousing with the village
riff-raff_. MARLOW _and_ HASTINGS _arrive, and inquire the
way to_ MR. HARDCASTLE'S _house_. TONY _tells them they
cannot possibly reach the house that night, but directs them
to it as an inn_.
TONY: The old Buck's Head on the hill, one of the best inns in the
whole county. But the landlord is rich and just going to leave off
business; so he wants to be thought a gentleman, and will be for giving
you his company. Ecod, he'll persuade you that his mother was an
alderman, and his aunt a justice of the peace. I'll just step myself,
and show you a piece of the way.
SCENE.--_The hall of_ HARDCASTLE'S _house_. MARLOW _and_ HASTINGS
_have just arrived at the supposed inn, and the supposed
innkeeper is paying hospitable attention to their belongings.
Enter_ MARLOW _and_ HASTINGS.
HASTINGS: Upon my word, a very well-looking house; antique, but
creditable.
MARLOW: The usual fate of a large mansion. Having just ruined the
master by good housekeeping, it at last comes to levy contributions as
an inn.
HASTINGS: Good and bad, you have lived pretty much among them; and
yet, with all your experience you have never acquired any show of
assurance. How shall you behave to the lady you have come down to visit?
MARLOW: As I behave to all other ladies. A barmaid, or a milliner--but
to me a modest woman dressed out in her finery is the most tremendous
object in creation. An impudent fellow may counterfeit modesty, but
I'll be hanged if a modest man can counterfeit impudence. I shall bow
very low, answer yes and no, and I don't think I shall venture to look
her in the face. The fact is, I have really come down to forward your
affair, not mine. Miss Neville loves you, the family don't know you, as
my friend you are sure of a reception, and----Here comes mine host to
interrupt us.
HARDCASTLE: Heartily welcome once more, gentlemen; which is Mr.
Marlow? Sir, you are heartily welcome.
MARLOW: He has got our names from the servants already.
ignoring_ HARDCASTLE'S _attempts to join in
with a story of Marlborough at the siege of Denain_.
MARLOW: My good friend, a glass of that punch would help us to carry
on the siege.
HARDCASTLE: Punch sir! (_Aside_) This is the most unaccountable kind
of modesty I ever met with. Well, here, Mr. Marlow, here's to our better
acquaintance.
MARLOW: A very impudent fellow, but a character; I'll humour him.
Sir, my service to you. (_They drink_.) Well, now, what have you in the
house for supper?
HARDCASTLE: For supper! (_Aside_) Was ever such a request to a man in
his own house!
MARLOW: Yes, sir; supper. I begin to feel an appetite.
HARDCASTLE: Sure, such a brazen dog----Sir, I believe the bill of fare
is drawn out; you shall see it. (_The menu is produced and discussed in
scathing terms. Then_ MARLOW _insists on seeing himself that the beds
are properly aired_.) Well, sir, I will attend you. This may be modern
modesty, but I never saw anything so like old-fashioned impudence.
HASTINGS: This fellow's civilities begin to grow troublesome.
(_Enter_ MISS NEVILLE.) Miss Neville, by all that's happy!
MISS NEVILLE: My dear Hastings!
HASTINGS: But how could I have hoped to meet my dearest Constance
at an inn?
MISS NEVILLE: An inn! You mistake. My aunt, my guardian, lives here.
How could you think this house an inn?
HASTINGS: My friend, Mr. Marlow, and I were directed hither by a
young fellow----
MISS NEVILLE: One of my hopeful cousin's tricks.
HASTINGS: We must keep up the deception with Marlow; else he will
fly.
Hastings has planned to elope with Miss Neville; she wishes first to
get into her own hands her jewelry, which is in Mrs. Hardcastle's
possession. As they complete their plot Marlow enters.
HASTINGS: My dear Marlow, the most fortunate event! Let me present
Miss Constance Neville. She and Miss Hardcastle have just alighted to
take fresh horses. Miss Hardcastle will be here directly. Isn't it
fortunate?
MARLOW: Oh, yes; very fortunate, a most joyful encounter; but
our dresses, George! To-morrow will be every bit as convenient. Let it
be to-morrow.
HASTINGS: Pshaw, man! Courage, courage! It is but the first plunge.
KATE (_after a pause_): I am glad of your safe arrival, sir. I am
told you had some accidents by the way.
MARLOW: A few, madam. Yes, we had some. Yes, a good many. But should
be sorry, madam--I mean glad--of any accidents that are so agreeably
concluded. George, sure you won't go?
HASTINGS: You don't consider, man, that we are to manage a little
_tête-à-tête_ of our own.
MARLOW: I am afraid, madam, I--hem--grow tiresome.
KATE: Not at all, sir; there is nothing I like so much as grave
consideration. You were going to observe----
MARLOW: I was about to observe, madam--I was--I protest, I forgot----
KATE: Something about hypocrisy--this age of hypocrisy.
MARLOW: Ah, yes. In this age of hypocrisy there are few who--a--a----
But I see Miss Neville expects us; shall I----
KATE: I'll follow you. If I could teach him a little confidence!
Mrs. Hardcastle, Miss Neville, Hastings and Tony enter. In pursuance
of their plot, Constance engages Tony in a determined flirtation, to
his extreme disgust, while Hastings wins the heart of Mrs. Hardcastle
by extravagant flatteries. On the pretext of bringing the "dear,
sweet, pretty, provoking, undutiful boy" to a better mind, Hastings
gets rid of the ladies, and then offers to take Miss Neville off
Tony's hands. Tony joyfully engages to help the elopement, and procure
Miss Neville's jewels.
SCENE.--_As before. Enter_ TONY _with a casket_.
TONY: Ecod, I've got 'em. Cousin Con's necklaces, bobs and all. My
mother shan't cheat the poor souls out of their fortin. Here's (_enter_
HASTINGS) your sweetheart's jewels. If I hadn't a key to every drawer
in my mother's bureau---- Never you mind me. Zounds, here she comes.
Keep 'em. Morrice! Prance!
_who refuses to let her ward have her jewels_.
MRS. HARDCASTLE: They are missing, I assure you. My son knows they
are missing, and not to be found.
TONY: I can bear witness to that. I'll take my oath on't.
MISS NEVILLE: I detest garnets.
TONY: Don't be a fool! If she gives 'em you, take what you can get.
I've stolen your jewels out of the bureau. She's found it out, ecod,
by the noise. Fly to your spark, and he'll tell you all about it.
Vanish!
Kate has reported Marlow's bashfulness to Hardcastle, who has told
another tale. She has since learnt Marlow's blunder, and that he has
taken her in her "housewife's dress" for the barmaid. She has resolved
to test him in this character. She enters at the same time as Marlow,