**
FRANCIS McKINNON MORTON
MARY McKINNON McSWAIN
This little volume has been compiled for mothers and is lovingly offered
as a tribute to the memory of the almost perfect mother whose love
cradled my own childhood so sweetly as to make all motherhood forever
more dear to me.
It seems to be true that the years of a woman's life that sink deepest
into her heart and are fraught with her keenest joy and pain are the
years when her little children are clinging about her skirts. Then it is
that she is truly "wealthy with small cares, and small hands clinging to
her knees."  But then, too, she is often too busy with the passing of
the full days and the long nights, so often punctuated by the restless
clinging of rosy fingers and all the dear demands of babyhood, to
realize fully how blest are the days through which she is living.
It is especially for the busy mother that I have gathered this little
collection of beautiful thoughts about childhood and motherhood, from
some of the world's best thinkers.
I hope it may bring to some of them as much pleasure in the reading as
it has to me in the preparation.
The selections from the writings of Lucy Larcom, Holmes, Whittier,
Longfellow, Emerson, Lowell, Celia Thaxter, and Edith Thomas are used by
the courteous permission of the authorized publishers of these writers,
the Houghton Mifflin Company.
The selections from the writings of Robert Louis Stevenson are from "A
Child's Garden of Verses."
The selection from Sidney Lanier is taken from "The Poems of Sidney
Lanier."  Both are published by Charles Scribner's Sons and the
selections are used by permission of that firm.  The little poem from
Eugene Field is also used by special arrangement with Charles Scribner's
Sons, the authorized publishers of the works of Eugene Field.
The selections from the book called "The Finest Baby in the World" are
used by the courtesy of its publishers, the Fleming H. Revell Company.
The selection from Ruth McEnery Stuart is taken from "Napoleon Jackson,"
published by the Century Company, and is used with their permission.
The selection from the writings of Lewis Carroll is taken from the
"Adventures of Alice in Wonderland" and is used by permission of the
publishers, the Macmillan Company.
Acknowledgment is also made to the Bobbs-Merrill Company for the use of
the selections from the writings of James Whitcomb Riley, and to D.
Appleton & Co. for the selections from Bryant.
Acknowledgment is due the courtesy of the New York _Sun_ and the Denver
_News_ for the use of the selections credited to them.
An effort has been made to find the name and the author of each
selection used so that proper credit could be given with each.  This has
not been always possible and I have chosen not to leave out a beautiful
selection on that account.
George MacDonald says, "He who drops a beautiful thought into the heart
of a friend gives as the angels do"; and Emerson says that "Next to the
originator of a beautiful thought is the one who first quotes it."  So I
do not think that any one who has said anything beautiful about
childhood would wish to be left out of a Mother's Year Book even if the
credit for his work was not given quite correctly.
Where did you come from, Baby Dear?
Out of the Everywhere into the here.
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
But how did you come to us, you Dear?
God thought of you and so I am here.
_George MacDonald_
What is the dream in the Baby's eyes
As he lies and blinks in a mute surprise?
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Bathed in the dawnlight, what does he see
That slow years have hidden from you and from me?
_Tom Cordry_
Little Life from out the life Divine,
Little heart so near and dear to mine,
Little bark, new-launched upon Life's sea
Floating o'er the tide to mine and me,
Little comer on our shore of time,
Little ray from out God's great sublime,
Little traveller from Eternity
May my love protect and shelter thee.
_The Denver News_
What shall we wrap the Baby in?
Nothing that fingers have woven will do:
Looms of the heart weave ever anew:
Love, only Love is the right thread to spin
Love we must wrap the Baby in.
_Lucy Larcom_
Look at me with thy large brown eyes,
Philip, my King!
For round thee the purple shadow lies
Of babyhood's regal dignities.
Lay on my neck thy tiny hand,
With Love's invisible scepter laden;
I am thine Esther to command,
Till thou shalt find thy queen-handmaiden,
Philip, my King!
_Dinah Mulock Craik_
Nay, but our children in our midst,
What else but our hearts are they,
Walking on the ground?
If but the breeze blew harsh on one of them,
Mine eye says "No" to slumber all night long.
_From the "Hamasah"_
_Hittan idnibn al-Mu'alla of Tayyi_
We must take all our children bring us whether it
be Joy or Pain.
_Auerbach_
Oh child, what news from Heaven?
_Swinburne_
Sweet floweret, pledge o' meikle love,
And ward o' mony a prayer,
What heart o' stane wad thou na move,
Sae helpless, sweet and fair?
_Robert Burns_
His child's unsullied purity demands
The deepest reverence at a parent's hands.
_Juvenal_
Little Gossip, blithe and hale,
Tattling many a broken tale,
Singing many a tuneless song,
Lavish of a heedless tongue,
Simple maid, void of art,
Babbling out thy very heart.
_Ambrose Phillips_
O child!  O new-born denizen
Of Life's great city!  On thy head
The glory, of the morn is shed
Like a celestial benison.
_Longfellow_
Ah! This taking to one's arms a little group of
souls, fresh from the hand of God, and living with
them in loving companionship through all their
stainless years is, or ought to be, like living in Heaven,
for of such is the Heavenly Kingdom.
_J. G. Holland_
The sun of dawn,
That brightens through the mother's tender eyes.
_Tennyson_
We are so dull and thankless; and too slow
To catch the sunshine till it slips away,
And now it seems surpassing strange to me
That while I wore the badge of Motherhood,
I did not kiss more oft and tenderly
The little child that brought me only good.
_Mary Louise Riley Smith_
Children are God's apostles, day by day
Sent forth to preach of Love and Hope and Peace.
_Lowell_
She has forgotten her sufferings for joy that the
child is born.
_Kipling_
A Baby's feet, like sea-shells pink,
Might tempt, should Heaven see meet,
An angel's lips to kiss, we think,
A Baby's feet.
Like rose-hued sea flowers, toward the heart
They stretch and spread and wink
Their ten soft buds that part and meet.
_Swinburne_
Greek babies were like the babies of modern
Europe: equally troublesome, equally delightful to
their parents, equally uninteresting to the rest of
society.
_Mahaffy_
They knew as I do now, what keen delight
A strong man feels to watch the tender flight
Of little children playing in his sight.
_Edmund Gosse_
The child would twine
A trustful hand, unasked in thine
And find his comfort in thy face.
_Tennyson_
This little seed of life and love,
Just lent us for a day.
_Parsons_
Pray for the infant's soul:
With its spirit crown unsoiled.
_Philip James Bailey_
Child of brighter than the morning's birth,
And lovelier than all smiles that may be smiled
Save only of little children undefiled,
Sweet, perfect, witless of their own dear worth,
Like rose of love, mute melody of mirth,
Glad as a bird is when the woods are mild,
Adorable as is nothing save a child,
Hails with wide eyes and lips on earth,
His lovely life with all its heaven to be.
_Swinburne_
Where has he gone to, Mother's boy,
Little plaid dresses and curls of joy?
Who is this Gentleman, haughty in glance
Walking around in a new pair of pants?
_Folger McKinsey_
It is very nice to think
The world is full of meat and drink,
With little children saying grace
In every Christian kind of place.
_Robert Louis Stevenson_
Did truth on earth ever hide,
Hath innocence anywhere smiled,
Did purity anywhere bide,
They are found in the eyes of a child.
_Harry Alexander Moore_
Now he thinks he 'll go to sleep:
I can see the shadows creep
Over his eyes in soft eclipse,
Over his brow and over his lips,
Out to his little finger tips:
Softly sinking down he goes!
Down he goes!  Down he goes!
See!  He is hushed in sweet repose!
_J. G. Holland_
To what shall I liken her smiling
Upon me, her kneeling lover?
How it leaped from her lips to her eyelids,
And dimpled her wholly over,
Till her outstretched hands smiled also
And I almost seem to see
The very heart of her mother
Sending sun, through her veins, to me.
_Lowell_
Innocent child and snow-white flower,
Well are ye paired in your opening hour!
_Reprinted from Bryant's Complete Poetical Works, by permission of D.
Appleton & Company._
Ye are better than all the ballads
That ever were sung or said,
For ye are living poems
And all the rest are dead.
_Longfellow_
I wonder so that mothers ever fret
At little children clinging to their gown;
Or that the footprints, when the days are wet
Are ever black enough to make them frown,
If I could find a little muddy boot,
Or cap or jacket on my chamber floor,
If I could kiss a rosy, restless foot
And hear it patter in my house once more;
If I could mend a broken cart to-day,
To-morrow make a kite to reach the sky--
There is no woman in God's world could say
She was more blissfully content than I.
_Mary Louise Riley Smith_
The very souls of children readily receive the
impressions of those things that are dropped into
them while they are yet but soft.
_Plutarch_
As babes will sigh for deep content
When their sweet hearts for peace make room,
As given, not lent.
_Jean Ingelow_
Childhood soberly she wears,
Taking hold of woman's cares
Through love's outreach, unawares.
_Lucy Larcom_
I searched for love through many a weary mile,
Till, sick and weary, to my homestead turning
Thou earnest to greet me with a mother's smile
And there upon thy dearest features burning
I saw that love I long had sought in vain.
_Heine_
And still the children listed, their blue eyes
Fixed on their mother's face in wide surprise.
_Matthew Arnold_
So we will not sell the Baby!
Your gold and gems and stuff,
Were they ever so rare and precious
Would never be half enough!
For what would we care, My Dearie,
What glory the world put on,
If our beautiful darling was going,
If our beautiful darling was gone.
_Selected_
The happy children!  Full of frank surprise,
And sudden whims and innocent ecstacies:
What Godhead sparkles from their liquid eyes.
_Edmund Gosse_
In him woke
With his first babe's first cry, the noble wish
To save all earnings to the uttermost,
And give his child a better bringing up
Than his had been, or hers.
_Tennyson_
Children have more need of models than of critics.
_Joubert_
I wait for my story--the birds cannot sing it,
Not one as he sits on his tree;
The bells can not ring it, but long years oh, bring it
Such as I wish it to be.
_Jean Ingelow_
Thou who didst not erst deny
The mother-joy to Mary mild,
Blessed in the blessed child.
Which hearkened in meek babyhood
Her cradle hymn, albeit used
To all that music interfused
In breasts of angels high and good.
_Mrs. Browning_
So sits the while at home the mother well content.
_Robert Louis Stevenson_
What use to me the gold and silver hoard?
What use to me the gems most rich and rare?
Brighter by far--aye, bright beyond compare,
The joys my children to my heart afford.
_From the Japanese_
Never to living ears came sweeter sounds
Than when I heard thee, by our own fireside
First uttering, without words, a natural tune
While thou, a feeding babe, didst in thy joy
Sing at thy mother's breast.
_Wordsworth_
A woman lives
Not bettered, quickened toward the truth and good
Through being a mother?
_Mrs. Browning_
One's early life is certainly a great deal more
amusing to look back to than it used to be while it was
going on.
_Anne Thackeray Ritchie_
When thou hast taken thy repast,
Repose my babe on me;
So may thy mother and thy nurse
Thy cradle also be.
Sing lullaby, my little boy,
Sing lullaby, mine only joy.
_Anonymous_
Ere thy lips learn, too soon,
Their soft, first human tune,
Sweet, but less sweet than now,
And thy raised eyes to read
Glad and good things indeed,
But none so sweet as thou.
_Swinburne_
Beat upon mine, little heart! beat! beat!
Beat upon mine!  You are mine, my sweet!
All mine, from your pretty blue eyes to your feet.
_Tennyson_
What is the little one thinking about?
Very wonderful things no doubt!
Unwritten history!
Unfathomed mystery!
_J. G. Holland_
The real education of children is to keep them at
work and make them unselfish.
_Ambrosias_
Then be contented.
Thou hast got
The most of Heaven in thy young lot;
There's sky blue in thy cup.
_Hood_
Her infancy, a wonder-working charm,
Laid hold upon his love.
_Jean Ingelow_
So for the mother's sake the child was dear,
And dearer was the mother for the child.
_S. T. Coleridge_
A kiss when the day is over,
A kiss when the day begins,
My mamma's as full of kisses
As a nurse is full of pins.
_Selected_
The child-heart is so strange a little thing,
So mild, so timorously shy and small,
When grown-up hearts throb, it goes scampering
Behind the wall, nor dares peer out at all!
It is the veriest mouse
That hides in any house!
So wild a thing is any child-heart!
_James Whitcomb Riley_