******
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
electronic works
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
States.
copied or distributed:
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
that
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
License.  You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
Foundation
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org
Literary Archive Foundation
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
works.
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
new filenames and etext numbers.
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.
(Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
or filename 24689 would be found at: