restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
This audio reading of Poetics is read by
Robert Foster
Contents
Librivox Audio Recording Public Domain Certification:
The person or persons who have associated work with this document (the
"Dedicator" or "Certifier") hereby either (a) certifies that, to the
best of his knowledge, the work of authorship identified is in the
public domain of the country from which the work is published, or (b)
authorship identified below (the "Work") to the public domain. A
associated work, and for these purposes, is described as a "dedicator"
below.
this work. Certifier recognizes that his good faith efforts may not
shield him from liability if in fact the work certified is not in the
public domain.
Dedicator makes this dedication for the benefit of the public at large
and to the detriment of the Dedicator's heirs and successors. Dedicator
intends this dedication to be an overt act of relinquishment in
vested or contingent, in the Work. Dedicator understands that such
relinquishment of all rights includes the relinquishment of all rights
Dedicator recognizes that, once placed in the public domain, the Work
may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, used, modified,
built upon, or otherwise exploited by anyone for any purpose, commercial
or non-commercial, and in any way, including by methods that have not
yet been invented or conceived.
Audio formats available:
Apple AAC audiobook (16kbit mono) - M4B subfolder
Speex - SPX subfolder
Robert Foster,
Joshua Hutchinson
This file should be named 20685.txt.
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
License (available with this file or online at
Section 1.
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
share it without charge with others.
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
any work in any country outside the United States.
The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form.
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
Archive Foundation."
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Section 3 below.
may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to,
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.
LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the "Right of
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.
INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
you cause.
Section  2.
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
Section 3.
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.
The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org
Section 4.