**
material from the Google Print project.) Music transcribed
by Linda Cantoni, from The Civil War Songbook (Dover
Publications, 1977), and from 19th-Century sheet music in
the Library of Congress Civil War and Historic Sheet Music
The Good Old Songs
Washington, D.C.
Nineteen Hundred and Two
The Good Old
'61 to '65.
Our camp fires shone bright on the mountain
That frowned on the river below,
While we stood by our guns in the morning,
And eagerly watched for the foe,
When a rider came out from the darkness
That hung over mountains and tree,
And shouted, "Boys, up and be ready,
For Sherman will march to the sea."
When cheer upon cheer for bold Sherman
Went up from each valley and glen,
And the bugle re-echoed the music
That came from the lips of the men,
For we knew that the stars on our banner
More bright in their splendor would be,
And that blessings from Northland would greet us
As Sherman marched down to the sea.
Then forward, boys, forward, to battle,
We marched on our wearysome way,
And we strewed the wild hills of Resaca--
God bless those who fell on that day.
Then Kennesaw, dark in its glory,
Frowned down on the flag of the free;
But the East and the West bore our standard
As Sherman marched down to the sea.
Still onward we pressed till our banner
Swept out from Atlanta's grim walls,
And the blood of the patriot dampened
The soil where traitor's flag falls.
But we paused not to weep for the fallen
Who slept by each river and tree;
Yet we twined them wreaths of the laurel
As Sherman marched down to the sea.
Proud, proud was our army that morning
That stood by the cypress and pine
When Sherman said, "Boys, you are weary;
This day fair Savannah is thine,"
Then sang we a song for our chieftain
That echoed o'er river and lea,
And the stars on our banner shone brighter
When Sherman marched on to the sea.
Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons.
Bring the good old bugle, boys, we'll sing another song,
Sing it with the spirit that will start the world along,--
Sing it as we used to sing it, fifty thousand strong,
While we were marching through Georgia.
"Hurrah! hurrah! we bring the Jubilee!
Hurrah! hurrah! the flag that makes you free!"
So we sang the chorus from Atlanta to the sea
While we were marching through Georgia.
How the darkies shouted when they heard the joyful sound!
How the turkeys gobbled which our commissary found!
How the sweet potatoes even started from the ground,
While we were marching through Georgia!--CHORUS.
Yes, and there were Union men who wept with joyful tears
When they saw the honored flag they had not seen for years;
Hardly could they be restrained from breaking forth in cheers
While we were marching through Georgia.--CHORUS.
"Sherman's dashing Yankee boys will never reach the coast!"
So the saucy rebel said, and 'twas a handsome boast;
Had they not forgotten, alas! to reckon with the host,
While we were marching through Georgia.--CHORUS.
So we made a thoroughfare for Freedom and her train,
Sixty miles in latitude,--three hundred to the main,
Treason fled before us, for resistance was in vain,
While we were marching through Georgia.--CHORUS.
Lift up your eyes, desponding freemen!
Fling to the winds your needless fears!
He who unfurled your beauteous banner
Says it shall wave a thousand years.
"A thousand years!" my own Columbia!
'Tis the glad day so long foretold!
'Tis the glad morn whose early twilight
Washington saw in times of old.
What if the clouds one little moment
Hid the blue sky where morn appears
When the bright sun that tints them crimson
Rises to shine a thousand years!--CHORUS.
Tell the great world these blessed tidings!
Yes, and be sure the bondman hears;
Tell the oppress'd of ev'ry nation
Jubilee lasts a thousand years.--CHORUS.
Envious foes beyond the ocean!
Little we heed your threat'ning sneers;
Little will they--our children's children
When you are gone a thousand years.--CHORUS.
Rebels at home! go hide your faces--
Weep for your crimes with bitter tears;
You could not bind the blessed daylight,
Though you should strive a thousand years.--CHORUS.
Back to your dens, ye secret traitors!
Down to your own degraded spheres!
Ere the first blaze of dazzling sunshine
Shortens your lives a thousand years.--CHORUS.
Haste thee along, thou glorious noonday!
Oh! for the eyes of ancient seers!
Oh! for the faith of Him who reckons
Each of His days a thousand years.--CHORUS.
Hail Columbia! happy land!
Hail, ye heroes! heaven-born band!
Who fought and bled in Freedom's cause,
Who fought and bled in Freedom's cause,
And when the storm of war was gone
Enjoyed the peace your valor won.
Let Independence be our boast,
Ever mindful what it cost;
Ever grateful for the prize,
Let its altar reach the skies.
Firm united let us be,
Rallying round our liberty;
As a band of brothers joined,
Peace and safety we shall find.
Immortal patriots, rise once more,
Defend your rights, defend your shore,
Let no rude foe, with impious hand,
Let no rude foe, with impious hand,
Invade the shrine where sacred lies,
Of toil and blood the well-earned prize.
While offering peace sincere and just,
In heaven we place a manly trust,
That truth and justice will prevail,
And every scheme of bondage fail.
Firm united let us be, etc.
Sound, sound the trump of fame!
Sound Washington's great name,
Ring through the world with loud applause,
Ring through the world with loud applause;
Let every clime to Freedom dear
Listen with a joyful ear;
With equal skill and godlike power,
He governed in the fearful hour
Of horrid war! or guides with ease
The happier times of honest peace,
Firm united let us be, etc.
Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons.
Just before the battle, mother,
I am thinking most of you,
While upon the field we're watching,
With the enemy in view.
Comrades brave are round me lying,
Fill'd with tho'ts of home and God,
For well they know that on the morrow
Some will sleep beneath the sod.
Farewell, mother, you may never
Press me to your heart again;
But oh, you'll not forget me, mother,
If I'm numbered with the slain.
Oh, I long to see you, mother,
And the loving ones at home;
But I'll never leave our banner
Till in honor I can come.
Tell the traitors, all around you,
That their cruel words we know
In every battle kill our soldiers
By the help they give the foe.--CHORUS.
Hark! I hear the bugle sounding,
'Tis the signal for the fight!
Now, may God protect me, mother,
As He ever does the right.
Hear the "Battle Cry of Freedom,"
How it swells upon the air!
Oh, yes, we'll rally round the standard,
Or we'll perish nobly there.--CHORUS.
By Maj. Charles G. Halpine (Private Miles O'Riley), 47th N.Y. Vol.
Inf.
There are bonds of all sorts in this world of ours,
Fetters of friendship and ties of flowers,
And true lovers' knots, I ween.
The boys and the girls are bound by a kiss,
But there's never a bond, old friend, like this:
We have drunk from the same canteen!
The same canteen, my soldier friend,
The same canteen;
There's never a bond like this:
We have drunk from the same canteen!
It was sometimes water and sometimes milk,
Sometimes apple-jack as fine as silk;
But, whatever the tipple has been,
We shared it together in bane or in bliss,
And I warn you, friend, when I think of this:
We have drunk from the same canteen.
We've shared our blankets and tents together,
And marched and fought in all kinds of weather,
And hungry and full we've been;
Had days of battle and days of rest,
But this memory I cling to and love the best:
We've drunk from the same canteen.
For when wounded I lay on the outer slope,
With my blood flowing fast and but little hope
On which my faint spirit might lean,
Oh! then, I remember, you crawled to my side,
And bleeding so fast it seemed both must have died,
We have drunk from the same canteen!
Oh! say, can you see by the dawn's early light
What so proudly we hailed at the twilight's last gleaming--
Whose broad stripes and bright stars through the perilous flight,
O'er the ramparts we watched, were so gallantly streaming!
And the rockets' red glare, the bombs bursting in air,
Gave proof through the night that our flag was still there;
Oh! say, does that Star Spangled Banner yet wave
O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave!
On that shore dimly seen through the mists of the deep,
Where the foe's haughty host in dread silence reposes,
What is that which the breeze, o'er the towering steep,
As it fitfully blows, now conceals, now discloses!
Now it catches the gleam of the morning's first beam,
In full glory reflected, now shines on the stream;
'Tis the Star Spangled Banner, oh! long may it wave
O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave!
And where is that band who so vauntingly swore
That the havoc of war and the battle's confusion
A home and a country should leave us no more?
Their blood has washed out their foul footsteps' pollution.
No refuge could save the hireling and slave
From the terror of flight or the gloom of the grave;
And the Star Spangled Banner in triumph doth wave
O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave.
Oh! thus be it ever when freemen shall stand
Between their loved homes and the war's desolation,
Blest with victory and peace, may the heaven-rescued land
Praise the power that hath made and preserved us a nation.
Then conquer we must, when our cause it is just,
And this be our motto--"In God is our trust"--
And the Star Spangled Banner in triumph shall wave
O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave!
Oh, yah! yah! darkies laugh wid me,
For the white folks say Old Shady's free,
So don't you see that the Jubilee
Is coming, coming, hail, mighty day!
Den away, away, for I can't wait any longer!
Hooray! hooray! I'm going home.
Oh! massa got scared, and so did his lady,
Dis chile breaks for Uncle Aby,
Open the gates, out here's Old Shady
A coming, coming, hail, mighty day.--CHORUS.
Good-bye, Massa Jeff; good-bye, Miss'r Stephens,
'Scuse dis nigger for takin' his leavens;
'Spect pretty soon you'll hear Uncle Abram's
Coming, coming, hail, mighty day.--CHORUS.
Good-bye, hard work, wid neber any pay,
I's gwine up North where de good folks say
Dat white wheat bread an' a dollar a day
Are a coming, coming, hail, mighty day.--CHORUS.
Oh! I've got a wife, and I've got a baby,
Living up yonder in upper Canaday;
Won't dey laugh when dey see Old Shady
Coming, coming, hail, mighty day.--CHORUS.
(Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons.)
Oh! Columbia, the gem of the ocean,
The home of the brave and the free,
The shrine of each patriot's devotion,
The world offers homage to thee.
Thy mandates make heroes assemble,
When Liberty's form stands in view;
Thy banners make tyranny tremble
When borne by the Red, White, and Blue.
When borne by the Red, White, and Blue,
When borne by the Red, White, and Blue,
Thy banners make tyranny tremble,
When borne by the Red, White, and Blue.
When war waged its wide desolation,
And threatened the land to deform,
The ark then of Freedom's foundation,
Columbia, rode safe through the storm,
With her garlands of vict'ry around her,
When so proudly she bore her brave crew,
With her flag proudly floating before her,
The boast of the Red, White, and Blue.--CHORUS.
That banner, that banner bring hither,
Tho' rebels and traitors look grim;
May the wreaths it has won never wither,
Nor the stars of its glory grow dim!
May the service united ne'er sever,
But they to their colors prove true!
The Army and Navy forever,
Three cheers for the Red, White, and Blue.--CHORUS.
Air--"SWEET BYE AND BYE."
There's a spot that the soldiers all love,
The mess-tent is the place that we mean,
And the dish that we like to see there
Is the old-fashioned, white Army bean.
'Tis the bean that we mean,
And we'll eat as we ne'er ate before
The Army bean, nice and clean;
We will stick to our beans evermore.
Now, the bean in its primitive state
Is a plant we have all often met,
And, when cooked in the old army style,
It has charms we can never forget.
The German is fond of sauer kraut,
The potato is loved by the Mick,
But the soldiers have long since found out
That thro' life to our beans we should stick.--CHORUS.
Air--"TELL AUNT RHODA."
Beans for breakfast,
Beans for dinner,
Beans for supper,
Beans! Beans!! Beans!!!