**
A verse may finde him whom a sermon flies,
And turn delight into a sacrifice.
--Herbert.
Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1887, by
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington, D.C.
This volume owes its existence to the desire of some of the teachers and
pupils of the public schools in the northeastern part of Cecil county,
to do honor to the memory of the late School Commissioner David Scott.
Shortly after Mr. Scott's death, some of the parties referred to,
proposed to collect enough money by voluntary contributions to erect a
monument over his grave, in order to perpetuate his memory, and also to
show the high regard in which he was held by them. This project being
brought to the knowledge of the editor, he ventured to express the
opinion that the best monument Mr. Scott could have, would be the
collection and publication of his poems in book form. This suggestion
met the approbation of the originators of the project, who asked the
writer to undertake the work of collecting the poems and editing the
book. Subsequent investigation showed that Mr. Scott had not left enough
poems to justify their publication in a volume by themselves; and the
original plan of the work was changed, so as to include, so far as it
has been practicable to do so, the writings of all the native poets of
the county, and those who though not natives, have resided and written
in it.
Owing to causes not necessary to state it was impracticable, in some
cases, to make as creditable a selection as could have been made had it
been possible to have had access to all the poetry of the different
writers. In a few instances the book contains all the poetry of the
different writers that it has been practicable to obtain. Herein, it is
hoped, will be found sufficient apology, if any apology is needed, for
the character of some of the matter in the book.
If any apology is needed for the prominence given to the poems of David
Scott (of John.) it may be found in the foregoing statement concerning
the origin of the book; and in the fact, that, for more than a quarter
of a century, the editor was probably his most intimate friend. So
intimate indeed were the relations between Mr. Scott and the writer,
that the latter had the pleasure of reading many of his friend's poems
before they were published. The same may be said in a more extended
sense, of the poems of David Scott (of James) to whose example and
teaching, as well as to that of the other Mr. Scott--for he was a pupil
of each of them--the writer owes much of whatever literary ability he
may possess.
The editor is also on terms of intimacy with many of the other
contemporary writers whose poetry appears in the book, and has striven
to do justice to their literary ability, by the selection of such of
their poems as are best calculated, in his opinion, to do credit to
them, without offending the taste of the most fastidious readers of the
book.
From the foregoing statement it will be apparent that the object of the
editor was not to produce a book of poetical jems, but only to select
the poems best adapted to the exemplification of the diversified talents
of their authors. The work has been a labor of love; and though
conscious that it has been imperfectly performed, the compiler ventures
to express the hope that it will be received by a generous and
discriminating public, in the same spirit in which it was done.
It is a remarkable fact that all the native poets of Cecil county except
one or two were born in the northern part of it, and within about eight
miles of the boundary line between Maryland and Pennsylvania. What
effect, if any, the pure atmosphere and picturesque scenery of the
country along the banks and romantic hills of the Susquehanna and
Octoraro may have had to do with producing or developing poetical
genius, cannot be told; but nevertheless it is a fact, that William P.,
and Edwin E. Ewing, Emma Alice Browne, Alice Coale Simpers, John M.
Cooley and Rachel E. Patterson were born and wrote much of their poetry,
as did also Mrs. Caroline Hall, in that beautifully diversified and
lovely section of the county.
It is also worthy of note that Tobias and Zebulon Rudulph were brothers,
as are also William P. and Edwin E. Ewing; and that Mrs. Caroline Hall
was of the same family; and that Folger McKinsey and William J. Jones
are cousins, as are also Mrs. James McCormick and Mrs. Frank J.
Darlington, and Emma Alice Browne and George Johnston.
Owing to the fact that the size of the book was necessarily limited by
the price of it; and to the fact that the poems of three of the writers
were not obtained until after a large part of the book had been printed,
it was impossible to give some of the writers, whose proper places were
in the latter part of the book, as much space as was desirable. For the
reason just stated, the editor was compelled to omit a large number of
excellent poems, written by David Scott (of James,) and others.
DAVID SCOTT (of John.)
Biography
Lines Suggested by the Singing of a Bird
An Eastern Tale
The Market-Man's License
Lines on the death of Mrs. Elizabeth Scott
My Schoolboy Days
The Donation Visit
Lines on the death of Miss Mary Hayes
Lines on the death of Miss Eleanora Henderson
Lines on the death of Mrs. Burnite
Stanzas read at the Seventy-second Anniversary of the birthday of Joseph
Steele
To Mary
Impromptu to Mrs. Anna C. Baker
Lament for the year 1877
Verses presented to my Daughter
Lines on the death of a young lady of Wilmington
Youthful Reminiscences
Stanzas to a little girl on her birthday
To Miss Mary Bain
Stanzas addressed to Mr. and Mrs. T. Jefferson Scott
Birthday Verses written for a little girl on her ninth birthday
Roll Call
In Memoriam Rensellaer Biddle
Stanzas written on the fly leaf of a child's Bible
Christmas Greeting, 1877
Anniversary Poem read at the anniversary of the Seventieth birthday of
Mrs. Ann Peterson
Lines on the death of Jane Flounders
What is Matter?
Anniversary Hymn
The Intellectual Telegraph
Lines on an Indian Arrow-Head
Acrostic to Miss Annie Eliza McNamee
Minutes of the Jackson Hall Debating Society, Dec. 5, 1877
Retrospection
Acrostic to Miss Florence Wilson McNamee
The Book of Books
The Lesson of the Seasons
John A. Calhoun, My Joe John
Biography
My Brother
My Father. In Memoriam, 1857
At the Nightfall
The Midnight Chime
May-Thalia
Memories
The Old Homestead
Gurtha
In Memoriam. John B. Abrahams
Missive to ----
Chick-A-Dee's Song
To My Sister
Measuring the Baby
The Light of Dreams
Ben Hafed's Meed
Winter Bound
Misled
At Milking time
The Singer's Song
Aunt Betty's Thanksgiving
In Hoc Signo Vinces
How Katie Saved the Train
Off the Skidloe
Life's Crosses
Biography
The Mother to her dead boy
To a Dove
Fall of Superstition
The Infant St. John the Baptist
Shelley's Obsequies
The Fountain Revisited
Death of Samson
An Infant's prayer
Biography
A Story with a Moral
Forty Years After
The Past
Loved and Lost
Death of Henry Clay, Jr.
A Valentine
Lines suggested on visiting the grave of a dear Friend
Biography
Stonewall Jackson
In Memoriam
New Year Ode
My Birthday
MRS. ANNIE McCARER DARLINGTON.
Biography
A Birthday Greeting
Murmurings
The Old Oak Tree
Sweet Florida
Evening
Biography
Hymn
Hymn
Rejoicing in Hope
Hymn
Remorse
Morning
Biography
The Cherubim
Death and Beauty
Take the Harp
Death of the Beautiful
Asphodel
Biography
The Angel Voice
Then and Now
The Neglected Harp
Alone
Gone Astray
Lay of the Last Indian
Biography
Influences
Musings
Lines
Biography
Sketch of a Landscape
With a Rose in January
Life
Biography
On Receipt of a Bouquet
October
Old Letters
June Roses
Music
Lines on the death of a Friend
Biography
At the Party
Mother and Son
The Missionary's Story
Transition
Dorothy Moore
Homeward Bound
Biography
Here and Hereafter
The Turtle's Sermon
Skye
If You don't believe it, try it
Bye and Bye
Biography
Autumn
Mary's Grave
To Anselmo
Flowers
Life
Biography
His Last Tune
Advice to an Ambitious Youth
Too Late
After the Shower
Tribute to the Memory of David Scott (of John)
Spring
JAMES McCAULEY.
Biography
Henry Clay
Virtuous Age
Acrostic
Work To-day
On the death of a Child
Spring
Hope
Autumn
MRS. IDA McCORMICK.
Biography
My Fancy Land
With the Tide
The Old Fashion
My Baby and the Rose
FOLGER McKINSKY.
Biography
Waiting their Crowns
Sea Echoes
Where Fancy Dwells
At Key's Grave
The Eternal Life
Biography
Woman's Rights
Only A Baby
To Helen
Biography
Judge Not
The Wish
The Christian's Anchor
Biography
God Is Great
Biography
Selection from Tancred
Biography
The Surprise
Thoughts on the death of my grandchild Fanny
The Decree
A view from Mount Carmel
Biography
The Miller's Romance
The Last Time
Only a Simple Maid
The Mystic Clock
Rube and Will
The Legend of St. Bavon
DAVID SCOTT (of James.)
Biography
The Forced Alliance
My Cottage Home
The Mighty One
The Surviving Thought
The Working-Man's Song
Ode to Death
Biography
On the Mountains
Progress
Winter
Lines Written in St. Ann's Cemetery
Merry May
DAVID SCOTT (of John.)
David Scott (of John,) so-called to distinguish him from his first
cousin David Scott (of James,) was the grandson of David Scott, who
emigrated from Ireland in the latter part of the eighteenth century and
settled not far from Cowantown in the Fourth district. His son John, the
father of the subject of this sketch, was born in Ireland, but was quite
young when his father came to this country.
David, the subject of this sketch, was born quite near to what was
formerly known as Dysart's Tavern, now Appleton, on the 2nd of
September, 1817, and died near Cowantown, on the 14th of November, 1885.
All his life was spent within about two miles of the place of his birth,
and most of it on the Big Elk creek at what was known while he owned
them, as "Scott's Mills." His early life was devoted to farming, but
upon reaching the proper age he learned the trade of augermaking, which
at that time was one of the leading industries of this county, and at
which he soon became an expert workman, as well as a skilful worker in
iron and steel. The editor of this book has heard him remark that when
he could find no one else capable of making odd pieces of ironwork for
the machinery in his mills he would take the hammer and make them
himself, and has also seen him make and temper the knives for a spoke
machine which he used for a time in his bending mill.
He and the late Palmer C. Ricketts were intimate friends in boyhood and
remained such during the lifetime of Mr. Ricketts. Mr. Ricketts being of
a literary turn of mind, their friendship probably had much to do with
forming the literary tastes and shaping the political opinions of Mr.
Scott.
Mr. Scott was originally a Democrat, and when only about 23 years of age
is said to have aspired to a seat in the General Assembly of his native
State. But the leaders of the party failed to recognize his claims, and
he shortly afterwards was instrumental in the formation of the first
politico temperance organization in this county, and ran for the House
of Delegates on the first temperance ticket placed before the people in
time and talents being engrossed in business, but in 1853 at the
solicitation of his friend Ricketts, he consented to be a candidate for
County Commissioner, and succeeded in carrying the Fourth district in
which he lived, which was then known as the Gibraltar of Democracy, by a
small majority, and securing his election by a majority of one vote over
Griffith M. Eldredge, his highest competitor on the Democratic ticket.
In 1855 he ran on the American ticket, with the late Samuel Miller and
Dr. Slater B. Stubbs, for the House of Delegates, and was elected by a
handsome majority.
In 1859 Mr. Scott consented to run on the American ticket for the State
Senate. His competitor was the late Joseph J. Heckart, who was elected.